  


Notes :  
1. In every Ashtapadi, the Pallavi is sung after every stanza, as a refrain.
2. Hyphens are added just to make the text easier to read
     - between the words that make up the Samasas or compound words
     - between words that are combined due to Sandhis.
     If the latter word in the Sandhi starts with a vowel, the
     letter after the hyphen would be the last consonant of
     the first word. Eg. भजता-मरोग should be read
     as भजतामरोग
3. The mUlam with additional notes for greater understanding
     is given in a separate file.

Kaanaadukaathaan Sri Vishvanatha Kavi


Kaanaadukaathaan Sri Vishvanatha Kavi, the author of Gita Gangeyam : A short life-sketch 

Amongst the many books inspired by Gita Govindam of Jayadeva, some of the well-known ones are Rama Ashtapadi, and Shivageetimaalaa. These celebrate Rama and Sita, and Shiva and Parvati as the hero and heroine of their work, respectively. One of the recent additions to such works, is the Gita Gangeyam, which has been written in the first half of the 20th Century, CE.

The author of this work is Sri Vishvanatha Kavi, who resided in Kaanaadukaathaan and in  Kundrakudi, in Tamil Nadu, India. He was born circa 1890 CE, and lived till around the age of sixty. His parents were Sri Ramasubramanya Sarma and Balambal, and they were residents of the Shivapuram Agraharam, in Srigokarnam. Srigokarnam (Tirugokarnam in Tamil) is  an important temple in Pudukottai, and Goddess Parvati, known there as Brhadamba, is the tutelary deity of the Tondamaan kings who ruled from Pudukkottai in the past few centuries. The Kavi’s family worshipped Lord Subrahmanya in Vaideeswaran Koil, and later in Kumaramalai (a small hill shrine near Pudukkottai) as their family deity. Later when he started residing in places around Kundrakudi, the family embraced Lord Subrahmanya of Kundrakudi as their chosen deity. In fact, he has composed Gita Gangeyam in praise of Lord Subrahmanya of Kundrakudi, which is also known as Mayuragiri. He has used synonyms for the place, such as Shikhi-shaila, Mayura-bhudhara etc. in the work.

Sri Vishvanatha Kavi completed his studies in the Vedas and became a Ghanapaathi. He was an Adhyaapaka (instructor) of the Vedas in the Vedapathashala in a village called Uyyakkondaan Siruvayal (now known as O. Siruvayal). He was also well-versed in the Valmiki Ramayana and used to conduct discourses on the Ramayana. In the Tamil month of Aippasi (Ashvayuji), he also held readings of the Tulaa Puraanam, which extols the greatness of River Kaaveri. Apart from these, he was also a Shaabdika (grammarian), who could perform Ashtaavadhaanam in Vyaakarana (i.e. he could pay attention to and respond to eight different kinds of queries simultaneously posed to him regarding grammar). He was also devoted to his spiritual routine and would not eat until he completed his Shiva Panchaayatana Puja everyday. He had great devotion towards Mahasvami of Kanchi, as well as towards Kutraalam Mouna Svami, whose Math he would occasionally visit and spend a month or so in.

Family members of Sri Vishvanatha Kavi recall that when they later went to have Darshan, Kanchi Mahasvami told them about him, and enquired if they had learnt anything from him. It is also said that the Mahasvami directed some people with doubts in some texts to Sri Vishvanatha Kavi for clarifications.

About fifty years ago, the family (then living in Thirumeyyam) had a visitor from the French Institute of Puducherry, who wanted to collect the works of Kavi. When they searched the ancestral house in Kundrakudi, the room was seen to be invaded by termites. The few available manuscripts were taken by the visitor to the French Institute. Those works were in the Grantha script, it is said. As of now, the only work available to us is the Gita Gangeyam.

Sri Vishvanatha Kavi was married to Smt. Meenakshi. Having no children, the couple adopted his brother’s son Sri Ramanathan. Sri Ramanathan completed his Vedic studies upto Ghana, and also mastered South Indian Classical music, having taken lessons from Sri Kottaiyur Ramachandra Bhaagavatar. Sri Ramanathan’s younger son Sri Meenakshisundaram is a musician and music teacher, and his son, Sri Kundrakudi M. Balamuralikrishna is a well-known vocalist today. 

The immensely famous violinist of yesteryears, Kunnakkudi R. Vaidyanathan, also belongs to this family. His father Sri Ramaswamy was another younger brother of Sri Vishvanatha Kavi.

Sri Vishvanatha Kavi spent his later years with his son’s family in Keezha-Poongudi. Till the end he continued his teaching and discourses. He was unwell only for a week before he passed away.

The Gita Gangeyam is a short Kavya, a great work filled with charming verses, that describes the sports of Lord Subrahmanya (Gangeya) and His younger consort Sri Valli. Although modelled after Gita Govindam, it has a rare beauty of its own. It has 24 Ashtapadis ( songs with 8 stanzas) in differing rhythms and has some Shlokas before and after each Ashtapadi. These Shlokas are set in a variety of Chandas (metres) and have amazing descriptions of Nature, the heroic deeds of Subrahmanya and various nuances of the emotions of love. Many are simply sublime prayers to Him.

The book was published in 1982 by Murugan Tiruvarut Sangam of Chennai, under the guidance of musician and scholar Sri TS Vasudevan. It was made part of the Guha Bhajana Sampradaaya and published in the book of Hari-hara-guha Bhajana Sampradaaya published by Sri AK Gopalan Bhagavatar.  Later it was also published by Pranatartihara Bhajana Mandali of  Bengaluru and then by Dr P Siva of Hyderabad. Reconciling these four sources, this book has now been uploaded online in www.sanskritdocuments.org, under the Stotras of Subrahmanya. We hope many will read and appreciate this beautiful Kavya and musicians will add songs from it in their repertoire. 

Note : Some of the lesser known words have been spelt here with double a’s to aid their correct pronunciation.

Enocoded, edited, and proofread by
      Rajani Arjun Shankar rajani_arjun at yahoo.com
