UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO LIBRARY
WILLIAM  H.  DONNER COLLECTION
purchased  from a  gift  by
THE  DONNER  CANADIAN FOUNDATION
Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arciiive
in  2008  with  funding  from
IVIicrosoft  Corporation
Iittp://www.arcliive.org/details/englislitranslati01susruoft
<>
AN  ENGLISH  TRANSLATION
OF
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.
Vol.  l.—SUTRASTHANAM.
AN    ENGLISH    TRANSLATION  ,
OF
THE'  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA
BASED  ON  ORIGINAL  SANSKRIT  TEXT.
Wt
EDITED    AND    PUBLISHED BY
KAVIRAJ  KUNJA  LAL  BHISHAGRATNA
WITH  A  FULL  AND  COMPREHENSIVE  INTRODUCTION,  TRANSLATION
OF  DIFFERENT  READINGS,    NOTES,  COMPARATIVE
VIEWS,    INDEX,    GLOSSARY
&.
PLATES. (  IN  THREE  VOL  UMES.  )
Vol.  I.-SUTRASTHANAM.
CALCUTTA :  ^
No.    lO,    KASHI    GHOSE'S   LANE.       '
1907.  *  -•
.  f'
srf3
Printed  by  J.  N.  Bose. '  '^  /        College  Square,  Calcutta.
MW  Riqhtx  Rexd'ved)
•
WAHAMAIlUPAbHVAYA   KAVIRAJ   DVARKANAIH   SEN,  KAVIKATNA. ( In  Durbar  dress )
ii^W
mv^  ^^^  ^wm  vi  w^^
[Ni
/
II  w^ff^  II
PREFACE.
--^^B'
Xo  special ^polcfgy  is  necessary  for  the  publication of  an  English  translation  of  the  Sushruta  Samhita.  The vast  medical  literature  of  ancient  India  practically remains  as  yet  unexplored,  and  any  undertaking,  which „has  the  obiect  of  making  that  terra  incognita,  known  to thescientific  world,  is  bound  to  be  welcomedby  the  public. Spasmodic  attempts  have  been  made  by  several  scholars and  erudite  bodies  to  bring  out  an  English  translation  of the  Sushruta  Samhita,  as  the  most  representative  work  of the  Ayurveda,  but  we  regret  to  say  that  such  efforts  have hitherto  proved  abortive.  In  spite  of  incomplete  infor- mation on  the  subject  many  drugs  of  the  Ayurvedic ?vlateria  Medica  have  been  adopted  by  different  foreign systems  of  medicine,  and  this  has  afforded  us  a  fresh impetus  to  issue  an  English  translation  of  the  book,  which not  only  deals  with  the  essentials  of  Indian  Therapeutics but  embraces  the  whole  range  of  the  science  of  A3airveda, as  it  was  understood   and  practised  by  the  Vedic  sages.
We  sincerely  hope  that  the  English  rendering  of Sushruta,  which  we  have  undertaken,  will,  when completed,  supply  a  long-felt  want  and  help  to  start a  fuller  inquiry  into  the  properties  of  the  indige- nous drugs  of  India.  Many  institutions  have  been already  started  both  in  England  and  Germany  with the  sole  object  of  studying  the  reti(^logy  of  tropical diseases,  and  of  formulating  an  empirical  system  of their  prevention  and  cure,  and  we,  hope  an  I4nglish translation    of  the    Sushruta    Samhita,    embracing  as  it
^11
does  the  results  of  researches  made  by  our  ancient Rishis  ill  the  land  of  their  origin(^  may  contribute  no small  amount  of  useful  information  to  those  bodies. "We  have  many  things  to  learn"  observes  Lt.  Col.  C.  P. Lukis,  M.b.,  F.R.C.S.,  I. M.S.,  Principal,  Medical  College, Calcutta,  "from  the  people  of  this  country  in  respect of  medicine  and  medical  science,"  and  five  doubt  not that  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the  contents  of  this splendid  monument  of  the  Ayurveda  in  quarters  where it  has  every  chance  of  being  utilised  and  improved upon  will  make  the  Inmian  race  better  equipped  too combat  the  ills  of  life.
A  few  remarks  on  the  method  we  have  adopted  in editing  this  work  are  necessarv  by  way  of  explana- tion. We  have  carefully  collated  all  the  available texts  of  the  Sushruta  Samhita,  whether  printed or  otherwise,  expunging  from  the  body  of  our  work all  texts,  which,  though  not  proved  to  be  wholly spurious,  are  of  questionable  authority,  and  putting them  in  foot-notes  as  "Different  Readings"  or  "Additional Texts."  In  cases  of  doubt  or  discrepancy  of  opinion we  have  thought  fit  to  abide  by  the  decision  of our  revered  preceptor,  Mahamahopadhyaya  Kaviraj Dvarkanath  Sen,  Kaviratna,  and  inserted  within brackets  explanatory  clauses,  where  a  strictly  literal translation  of  texts  would  not  convey  their  true  meaning. In  many  instances  it  is  impossible  to  find  in  the  English language  equivalent  words  for  the  technical  terms  of  the A3'urveda.  In  such  cases  we  have  put  approximate English  words  within  brackets,  after  the  original  Sanskrit terms.  For  exapiple  we  have  translated  the  term  Ojah as  albumen.  Sut  the  Ojah  of  the  Ayurveda  is  a  disputed thing,  t  It  may  mean  something  like  but  not  exactl)' albumen;    glycogen,     which    contributes    largely     to
Ill  "^        ,
the  reproductive  activity  of  tlfe  body  in  certaiR)*instances. would  appear  to  be  the  more  correct  description.  In cases  like  this  we  h'ave  not  put  before  our  readers, any  suggestions  of  our  own,  but  left  them  free  to draw  their  own  inference.  And  for  this  purpose  we further  intend  to  Append  to  the  last  volume  of  this work  an  index  a,nd  a  glossary  illustrating  the  possible meanings  of  the  Ayurvedic  terms  with  English  and Latin  synonyms,  wherever  possible.  The  true  meaning of  the  Ayurveda  can  be  better  explained  or  understood only  with  the  light  of  moder.n  science,  and  we  leave  it to  our  European  colleagues  to  carry  on  the  research  on the  lines  we  have  suggested  with  regard  to  this  ancient S3'stem  of  medicine,  which  a  better  knowledge  of  its principles  and  methods  will  enable  them  to  do.
By  a  lamentable  oversight,  the  terms  Vayu,  Pittani, Kaphah  and  Dosha  have  been  translated  as  wind,  bile, phlegm  and  humour  in  the  first  few  chapters.
For  the  sake  of  convenience  we  have  divided  the entire  work  into  three  volumes,  the  first  containing  only the  Sutrasthanam,  the  second  Xidanam,  Sharira  and Chikitsa,  and  the  third  Kalpa  and  Uttara  Tantram.
We  have  adopted  the  diagrams  of  surgical  instruments from  that  most  valuable  work  of  the  Thakore  Saheb  of Gondal,  called  the  History  of  the  Aryan  Medical Science,  for  which  I  am  particularly  indebted  to  His Highness.
In  conclusion,  we  beg  to  conve\'  our  sincerest  thanks to  our  preceptor's  son  Kaviraj  Jogendranath  Sen  Vidya- bhusana  M.  A.,  Dr.  U.  D.  Banerji  L.  R.  C.  P.,  M.  R.  C.  S. (Lond),  and  Lt.  Col.  K.  P.  Gupta  M.  A.,  M.  D.,  I.  ^l.  S., Professor  Janakinath  Bhattacharya  M.A.  B?L.,  P.R.S. for  having  kindly  examined  the  different  portions of  the    manuscript.     I  am  grateful  to  Dr.  Surendranath
<■    IV
t
f  #
(josvaini   B^A.,  L.  M.  S.    teo,  for   the  kind  interest    he has  all 'along  taken  in  the  publicittion   of  this    work  and />i"or   various    intelhgent  suggestions,  which  haxc  been  of consfderable  help  to  me.
My  thanks  are  also  due  to  numerous  learned  authors, ancient  and  modern 'from  whose  writings,  I  ha\e  found it  necessary  to  make  frequent  quotcition^.
10,  Kashi  Ghose's  Laxe.    ]  KUNJA    LAL  BIIISHAGKATNA.
i.-^t  TJeceiiiher,  igoy.  \
CALCUTTA.  J  Kaviraj.
TNTRODTK^TION.
^^
Sushruta  :— His    age    and    personality  :— A    few
preliminary  observations  regarding  the  technique  of  the Ayurvedic  system  of  medicine  are  necessary  at  the outset  to  correctly  understand  thp  aim  and  scope  of  the Sushruta  Samhita.  Who  was  Sushruta  ?  When  and where  did  he  live  and  flourish  ?  These  are  questions that  would  naturally  suggest  themselves  to  the  readers  of the  following  pages  ;  but  the}^  can  only  be  imperfectly answered  like  all  similar  questions  respecting  the  lives of  our  ancient  worthies.  In  a  country  like  India where  life  itself  was  simply  regarded  as  an  illusion,  the lives  of  kings  or  commoners  were  deemed  matters  of  little moment  to  the  vital  economy  of  the  race  ;  and  all  histories and  biographies  were  looked  upon  as  the  embodiment of  thLe  flimsy  vanities  of  life.  Lives  of  saints  and  canonised kings  had  been  made  use  of  in  certain  instances  as  themes of  national  epics.  But  they  were  intended  more  to  elucidate or  enunciate  the  doctrines  of  certain  schools  of  Ethics  or Metaphysics  than  to  record  any  historical  fact  or  event. Authentic  history  we  have  none  beyond  chronicles  of  state events  and  royal  names  in  some  instances  ;  and  those  which are  usually  found  in  the  Sanskrit  Puranas  are  strange  com- binations of  myths  and  legends,  which  often  contradict each  other.  Hence  the  utter  futility  of  attempts  to  explain a  historical  fact  by  the  light  of  a  votive  npdal  or  tablet unearthed  perhaps  frorri  the  ruins  of  one  of  sur  ancient cities.  Such  an  endeavour  serves,  in  most  cases,  only  to make  the  "  darkness  visible,  "  •  and  the  confusion  more confounded.
ii  'iNTROniTCTIOX.
Identity  of  Sushruta  and  Divodasa  :— It  is  only  safe to  assert  that  Sushruta  was  of  tl>e  raceof  Vishvamitra.  The Mahabharatam  f  i)  represents  him  as  a  son  of  that  roval  sage. This  coincides  with  the  description  given  of  him  in  the  present recension  of  the  Samhita.  The  Garuda  Puranam  (2)  places Divodasa  as  fourth  in  descent  from  Dhanvantari,  the  first propounder  of  medical  science  on  earti},  whereas  the Sushruta  Samhita  describes  the  two  as  identical  persons.  But this  apparent  anomaly  in  the  Samhita  can  be  accounted for,  if  we  consider  that  in  some  parts  of  India  the  custom still  prevails  of  appending,  for  the  purposes  of  better  identi- fication, the  name  of  one's  father,  or  of  a  glorious  ancestor to  one's  name,  and  it  is  therefore  not  surprising  that Divodasa  (the  preceptor  of  Sushruta),  who  was  a  firm believer  in  the  doctrine  of  psychic  transmigration,  should represent  himself  as  an  incarnation  of  Dhanvantari,  and a=.sume  his  name  and  style  in  the  usual  wav.  Revond  this meagre  genealogy  we  possess  no  trustworthy  information regarding  the  life  and  personalitv  of  Sushruta,  the  father  of Indian  Surgery.
Age  of  the  Sushruta  Samhita:— We  have  no  means  of ascertaining  what  the  Samhita  was  like  as  originally  written hv  Sushruta,  the    present  being  only  a  recension, or  rather  a
Mahahhiralam — Anushasan  Parva,  Ch.  W
(2}    f^-^rf*T^TC^T<T  Tnf^E^T^?i:  %<^v.  1
^T5?I^T3I»??T'Pr*T^r:  f^Tr??T^»^^3:  II
Garuda  PuranAm,  Chap.  139,  \'s.  8- 11,
INTRODUCTION*  lil
>■>
recension  of  recensions,  made  oy  N^garjuna  (i)?  All  opinions concur  in  identifying  hifn  ^with  the  celebrated  founder  of the  Madhyamika  school  of  Buddhistic  philosophy — a  fac| which  materially  assists  us  in  fixing  the  age  of  the  present Samhita.  A  few  quotations  from  the  Vriddha  (old)  Sushruta are  all  that  are  preserved  of  the  oViginal  Sainhitu.  But their  genuineness  is  ot  a  problematic  character,  and  we  are not  sure  whether  the}-  are  the  productions  of  lesser  lights, or  of  ancient  though  less  renowned  commentators,  attri- buted to  the  master  to  invest  thciU  with  a  greater  sanctity ;ind  authority— a  practice  which  was  quite  common amongst  the  bibliographers  of  Ancient  India.
Date  of  Nagarjuna  :— At  all  events  Nagarjuna  who redacted  the  Sushruta  Samhita  lived  about  the  latter  part  of the  fourth    century    before    the__Chris£ian   era  ;(2)  and    the
Dallanas  Commentary,  Sulrasth^nam,  Ch.  I.  i.
Dallana  mentions  the  names  of  Jejjada,  Gayadasa  etc.,  as  the  redactors of  the  original  Samhita,  and  rejects  as  spurious  or  of  questionable  authority the  texts  which  cannot  be  found  in  their  editions  of  the  work.  Must probably  the  authoritative  verses  are  quotations  from  the  Vriddha  Sushruta.
Recension  or  Pratisamsk^ra  consists  in  curtaiUng  statements  that  have been  made  inordinately  elaborate,  and  in  dilating  upon  truths  lliat  have been  very  succinctly  dealt  with  in  the  original  book.  A  Redactor  or Pralisamaskarta   makes  an  old  book  new  again.
A  Samhita,  on  the  other  hand,   deals  with  aphorisms    coniained    in    the
Vedas.  ^
t^T^f^lfST?!  #f%m'TTT:  H^lf^cTT:  I
(2)      rT^T   VUT^Jf!:  SIT^nFff^  qif*!/^:  !
Rijatarangini  I.  Taranga.  Vs.  172-173.
IV  wtroAj
CTION.
original  or  V^rtddha  Sus|jruta  'must  have  been  wriUen  at least  two  centuries  earlier  in  order 'to  acquire  that  hoary aythority  and  prescription  of  age,*  which  alone  could have  given  its  right  to  a  recension  at  the  time.  Several scholars  on  the  authority  of  a  very  vague  and  general statement  concerning*  the  recension  of  the  Samhita in  Dallana's  commentary,  ascribe  th'e  authorship  of  the Uttaratantram  (latter  portion  of  '.the  Sushruta  Samhita)  to Nagarjuna.  We,  on  the  other  hand,  hold  the  Uttaratantram to   be   neither   an    interpolation,  nor  a  subsequent  addition,
•  but  that  it  forms  an  integral  portion  of  the  book  as  it  was originally  written,  though  not  planned  by  the  Rishi. In  the  first  Chapter  of  Sutrasthanani  Divodasa  formally divides  the  Science  of  Ayurveda  into  eight  subdivisions, such  as,  the  Shalya  (surgery),  Sh^iakya  (portion  treating  of diseases  restricted  to  super-clavicular  regions  such  as  the eyes,  etc.),  Kaya-Chikitsa  (general  diseases  such  as,  fever, etc.),  but  does  not  speak  anything  about  them  in  the  first  five Sthcinas  or  subdivisions  of  the  book.  It  is  only  once  in the  25th  chapter  of  the  Sutrasthanani  that  he  mentions the  name  of  Netravartma  (diseases  of  the  eyelids)  in  con- nection with  the  classification  of  surgical  operations.  It  is inxpossible  that  Divodasa  would  fall  short  of  his  duties by  omitting  to  give  instructions  on  all  the  subdivisions  of the  Ayurveda  as  he  promises  at  the  outset,  or  that  Sushruta would  leave  his  Samhita,  which  is  pre-eminently  a  work on   surgery,    incomplete    by  banishiiTg_^ophthalmic  ^surgery,
\  laryngotomy  or  fever-therapeutics  from  his  work.  From I  the  general  plan  of  the  book  we  can  safely  assert  that Sushruta  dealt  with  easier  or  more  elementary  topics  in the  first  five  subdivisions  of  his  Samhita  in  the  manner  of our  modern  progressive  readers,  reserving  the  discussion of  those  re^uirmg  a  more  advanced  knowledge  and  skill for  the  Uttaratantram.  The  Uttara*^^antram  has  not  been incluued  within  the  five  original  subdivisions  of  the  Samhita inasmuch    as   it  embraces   and    more   elaborately    discusses
INTRODUCl'ION.   J  V
>■>
lupics  which  legitimately  beloi^g  to,  ^or  are  but»incidentairy mentioned  in  those  subdivisions.  Hence  it  is  more  ot the  nature  of  an  appendix  or  supplement,  arising  out  of  the^ exigencies  of  the  original  subdivisions.  It  is  probable  that Nagarjuna  might  have  redacted  this  part  of  the  Samhita in  common  with  its  other  portions. (i}
Western  opipions*  on  the  subject :— The  consensus of  western  opinions  is  to  place  Nagarjuna  in  the  first quarter  of  the  third  Century  B.  C.  (2),  and  for  fixing Sushruta  as  a  contemporary  of  Sakya  Sinha  Buddha.  It i^  contended  that  the  age  immediately  preceding  Sakya Muni  was  a  period  of  decadence  in  Hindu  thought  ;  and the  Sushruta  Samhita  must  have  been  the  fruit  of  a  revived intellectual  activity  which  usually  follows  the  advent  of  a new  creed^an  assumption  which  is  in  favour  of  the hypothesis  of  Greek  influence  on  the  Hindu  system  of medicine.  But  great  men  there  had  been  in  India  before Buddha.  The  age  which  immediately  preceded  the  age of  Buddha  was  by  no  means  an  age  of  decadence  properly speaking,  the  age  which  followed  the  downfall  of  Buddliisin shows,  on  the  contrar}',  signs  of  true  decadence.  India  had had  eminent  philosophers  and  scientists  almost  contempo- raneously with  the  great  Buddha.  The  chronological  facts collected  above  from  the  Mahabharatam,  and  the  Garuda Puranam  could  have  been  construed  to  prove  that  the age  of  Sushruta  was  prior  to  that  of  the  Mahabharatam but  for  the  internal  evidence  furnished  by  the  Samhitn itself  as  to  the  probable  date  of  its  composition  which  we shall  have  occasion  to  deal  with  later  on.  ♦>
Extraneous  Evidence  :— Sushruta  is  mentioned  in    the
(i)     MaMmahopadhyaya    Kaviraj  Dvaiaka  N^lh  .^en     Kaviialna      of Calcutta  subscribes  to  this  opinion  — Tr.  ■,
(2)  Bael's  Buddhistic  Records  of  the  Western  World.    \'ol.  II.   P.  212. Stein's  Rdjatarant^uai.  >
(3)  Lalita-Vistarain — Raja  R.  L.  Mitter's  Edition,  Chaptef  I.
VI  *  INTRODUCTION.       ^-
V^rtikas    oP'(i)  Katyayana   ^4    Century  B.  C.)  and  we  have
no    hesitation   in   saying   thatP'^Iie*  original    Sarnhita     was
^vritten    at    least    two  centuries  before  the  birth  of  Buddha.
'■f We   are    equally   ready   to   admit,    on  the  other  hand,  that
the  tinal  recension  of  the  Sarnhita  by  Nagarjuna,  at  least  the
form    in    which    we    have    it,    was    made   about  the  second
Century  B.  C.  '         ^
Two  Nagarjunas  :— Several  scholars,  on  the  authority of  Dallana  (the  celebrated  commentator  of  the  Sushruta Samhita)  endeavour  to  establish  the  identity  of  Nagarjuna (the  redactor  of  this  Samhita)  with  his  namesake,  the celebrated  alchemist  of  the  tenth  Century  (2).  But  their contentions  fall  to  the  ground  when  we  know  that  many verses  of  the  Sushruta  Samhita  occur  in  the  works  of Bagbhat  (Ashtangahridayam)  and  Madhava  (Nidanam), which  are  two  of  the  works  which  were  translated  by  the order  of  the  Kaliph  (3)  in  the  eighth  century.  The  internal evidences  of  the  book  do  not  supply  us  with  any  authentic material  to  compose  anything  like  a  biography  of  this father  of  Hindu  Surgery.  •
Internal  Evidence  :— The  line  in  the  Samhita,  which has  formed  the  veritable  bone  of  contention  amongst scholars  of  all  shades  of  opinion  as  throwing  a  light  upon the  probable  date  of  its  composition,  occurs  ni  the  Sharira — Sthanam,  in  connection  with  the  development  of  the  foetal body  and  reads  as  "Subhuti  Gautama  said  that  it  is  the trunk  that  tirst  developed."
Conflicting  testimonies  and  the  uncertain  indication of  materiaSs  at  our  disposal  :  — It    is  a    matter  of  historic
(l)    f^^ffll^^^tf"
K;5 lyayana'si  V^rlikas  lo  Panini's  Grammar.
"'   Chakra  Dutta — Rash^yandhikara. (3)      P.  C.  Roy— Hindu  Chcmislry  p.  X\'1II.  (1902),
INTRODtTrTIOX.    '  VU
■>•)
certainty  that  Subhuti  was  o^e  of, the  personal  disciples of  Sakya  Sinha  Buddha,  and  that  it  was  customary amongst  the  contemporaVy  Buddliists  to  append  the  appela- , tion  of  their  (i)  lord  fGautama  or  Rodhisattva)  to  the  "name of  a  proselyte  to  accentuate  his  wisdom  and  sanctity  in  the world.  A  certain  section  of  scholars  is'never  tired  of  setting up  this  line  as  a  conclusive  evidence  of  the  fact  that  the Samhita  was,  at  best,  a  contemporary  production  of  early Buddhism.  But  they  shut  their  eyes  to  opinions  of Shaunaka  and  others  on  the  subject  quoted  exactl)'  in  the same  portion  of  the  book,  which  places  the  date  of  its composition  at  least  several  centuries  earlier.  Shaunaka, who  was  the  si.vth  in  remove  from  the  immortal  Vyasa  in direct  line  of  discipleship,  was  the  author  of  the  renowned Shaunaka  Samhita  of  the  Atharvan.  These  facts  lend  a very  plausible  colour  to  our  hypothesis  that  the  original Sushruta  Samhita  which,  was  first  composed  perhaps  con- temporaneously with  the  latter  portions  of  the  Atharvan, naturally  discussed  the  opinions  of  Shaunaka  and  other Vedic  embryologists,  while  Nagarjuna,  at  the  time  of redacting  that  book,  quoted  the  opinion  of  his  contemporar}' Subhuti  for  the  purpose  of  giving  him  an  equal  status  with the  Vedic  Rishis,  if  for  nothing  else.
Greek  Influence  : — As  regards  Hellenic  influence  on  the Hindu  system  of  medicine  and  on  the  Sushruta  Samhita  in special,  we  must  disabuse  our  mind  of  all  sentiments  of racial  vanity  and  proceed  to  investigate  the  case  in  a scientific  and  unprejudiced  spirit  before  giving  a  more detailed  account  of  the  contents  of  the  SushrutaiSamhita.
(i)  Nagarjuna  Bodhisattva  was  well  practised  in  the  art  of  compound- ing medicine.  N^gSrjuna  Bodhisattva  by  moistening  all  the  great  stones with  a  divine  and  superior  decoction  changed  them  into  gold.  — Bael's Buddhistic  Records  of  the  western  world  Vol.  II.
AnuvSk  19,  45.  46.  5.
iNTRonurrioN.
Su^hrufa  and  Hippocrates  -.—From  the  very  apparent similarity  which  exists  between  jhe  contents  of  this  Samhita •and  tjie  aphorisms  of  Hippocrates,  many  western  scholars are  apt  ,to  conclude  too  hastily  that  the  ancient  Indians drew  their  inspiration  in  the  healing  art  from  the  medical works  of  the  Greeks.  But  the  reverse  may  be  said  of the  Greeks  as  well  with  the  greater  confidence  because  such an  assertion  is  supported  by  historic  facts,  and  confirmed  by the  researches  of  the  scholars  of  the  west  (i).  According to  all  accounts  Pythagoras  was  the  founder  of  the  healing art  amongst  the  Greeks  and  the  Hellenic  peoples  in  general (2).  This  great  philosopher  imbibed  his  mysteries  and metaphysics  from  the  Brahmanas  of  India.  Mr.  Pocock in  his  Jnt^ia  in  Greece  identifies  him  with  Buddhagurus  or Buddha,  and  it  is  but  an  easy  inference  to  suppose  that he  carried  many  recipes  and  aphorisms  of  his  master's Ayurveda  with  him.  The  sacred  bean  of  Pythagoras  is thought  to  have  been  the  (3)  Indian  Nelumbium  (Utpalam). We  know  thai  simnllaneously  with  the  birth  of  Buddhism, Buddhist  Sramanas  were  sent  out  to  Greece,  Asia  minor. Egypt  and  ether  distant  countries  to  preach  their  new religion.  They  were  known  to  the  Greeks  and there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  the  Greek  Simnoi (venerable)  were  no  other  than  the  Buddhist  Sramanas  (4). Now  a  missionary  usually  teaches  the  sciences  of  his country  in  addition  to  the  preaching  of  his  gospel.  The distant  mission  stations  or  monasteries    of    Buddhism   were
(1)  There*1s  no  ground  whatever  to  suppose  that  Sushruta  borrowed his  system  of  medicine  from  the  Greeks.  On  the  contrary,  there  is  much to  tell  against  such  an  idea— Weber's  History  of  Indian  Literature.
(2)  The  Origin  and  Growth  of  the  Healing  Art — Bedroe  P.  162.
(3)  Pratt's  FloNiering  Plants.  Vol.  I    P.  57.
(4)  These  *Simoi  (venerable)  whom  Clemeni  of  Alexandria  has narraleil  to  have  rendered  worship  to  a  pjTamid  originally  dedicated  to tiie  relics  of  a  god,  were  the  Buddhi!»t  Arhals  (venerables)  Sramanas.
Lalita-Vistaram— T\:iia    R^jendra  I.ala  Milter's  Edition.  Ch.  I.
INTRODUGTION. ,  IX
the  principal  centres  for  disseaiinating  Brahm^»nic  culture in  distant  lands,  and  Hippocrates,  though  he  did  his'  utmost to  liberate  medical  sciertce  iVom  the  thraldom  of  speculative philosophy,  yet  might  have  thought  it  necessary  tG>tetain only  those  truths  of  the  Ayurveda  which  Pythagoras  and the  Buddhistic  brotherhood  might  have  imported  into  his country,  and  which  do  not  exactly  appertain  to  the  domain of  pure  metaphysics.  Of  course,  it  is  quite  possible  for  men of  different  nationalities  to  arrive  at  the  same  truth  cr conclusion  independently.  There  are  coincidences  i'l  science as  in  art  and  philosophy,  (i)  Gravitation  and  circulation of  blood  (2)  were  known  ta  tfite  Indians  long  before the  births  of  Newton  and  Harvey  in  Europe.  The  cele- brated atomic  theory  was  preached  in  the  Gangetic  valley some  five  hundred  years  before  the  birth  of  Christ  (3). But  well  may  we  ask  those,  who  still  adhere  to  this  Hellenic hobby,  to  look  at  the  reverse  side  of  the  picture  as  well. It  may  be  stated  without  the  least  fear  of  contradiction that  the  Charaka  and  Sushruta,  through  the  Channel  of Arabic,     Persian     and      Latin    translations   still   form    the
Siddhanla  Shiromani  (Bhaskaracharyaya)  GolodhyAya.
iT^^TR  ^R  ^fq  II    ???Tg  lifqcT'  ^^  %-^^  ^^^i  t%Tr:,  cI^t^  f^q^r
^JTT  T\\^^  T.w^^m:  I     VTT^fl^TaiiT  |     (BhavaprakasUa).
The  Hdrita  Samhitd,  which  according  to  certain  scholars,  is  older  than the  Sushruta  SamhitS,  refers  to  the  circulation  of  blood  in  describing I'induroga  (Anemia).  The  disease,  he  observes,  is  caused  by  eating  clay which  thus  blocks  the  lumen  of  veins  and  obstructs  the  circulation  of  blood, Bhcivamisra,  the  celebrated  author  of  Bh^vaprakdsham,  and  who  is  a century  older  than  Harvey,  has  the  above  couplets  bearing  on  the  sufcject.
(3)     Vaiseshika  Darshana  by  Kandda.
X  Introduction.
»«•
basis  of  all  sj-stems  of  s^ienti^c  medicines  in  the  world  (i). Of  these,  the  Sushruta  Samhit^  is  the  most  representative ;vork  of  the  Hindu  system  of  medicine.  It  embraces  all that  can  possibly  appertain  to  the  science  of  medicine  (2).
Sushruta  prior  to  Charaka  :— The  general  consensus of  expert  opinion  is  to  place  Charaka  prior  to  Sushruta  in respect  of  time.  But  the  Puninas  unat^mously  describe Sushruta  as  a  disciple  of  Dhanvantari,  the  first-propounder of  medical  science.  The  long  compounds  (samasas)  used by  him,  the  prose  and  metrical  portions  of  the  Sushruta after  the  models  of  Jaimini,  Patanjali,  and  other  philosophi,r cal  writers  who  had  adopted  prose  or  metre  according  to the  e.xegetic  or  rationalistic  tenor  of  the  subjects  in  their works,  have  all  been  cited  to  prove  Sushruta  a  contemporary of  the  Darshanas,  or  of  Buddha.  But  these  may  serve,  at least,  to  fix  the  date  of  the  recension  by  Nagarjuna,  i.e.,  the Sushruta  Samhita  as  we  have  it,  but  can  never  help  to determine  the  chronology  of  Sushruta,  the  disciple  of  Dhan- vantari "who  was  churned  out  of  the  primordial  ocean  in the  golden  age    (Satya   Yuga)    (3).     On  the    other    hand,  if
(l)   A,    "The  great  works  of  Charaka  and  Sushruta  were  translated  into
Arabic,  under  the  patronage  of  Kaliph  Almansur,  in    the   seventh  century.  
The  Arabic  version  of  Sushruta  is  known  by  the  name  of  "  Kelale- Shawshoore-al-Hindi."  These  translations  in  their  turn  were  rendered  into Latin.  The  Latin  versions  formed  the  basis  of  European  medicine,  which remained  indebted  to  the  Eastern  science  of  medicine  down  to  the seventeenth  century."— History  of  the  Aryan  Medical  science  (Th^kore Saheb  of  Gondal)  P.  196.
B,  For  tljc  indebtedness  of  Arabic  school  of  Medicine  to  the  works  of Indian  masters,  see  Puschmann  P.  162.
C.  BednVe.  Book  IV.  Ch.  IL  286—299. (2)     Dr.  Wise  (Hindu  system  of  medicine).
f^>?fT  ^?5^^'  ^'n?T^T  5B5f5TfT:  II
Garuda  PurSnam.     Chip.  142,  Vs.  5-6.
INTROniTC?ION.    ,  xi
the  testimonies  of  the  Puninas -♦have  anj-  histor^6al  worth, we  ca!i  safely  place  him  somewhere  in  the  Satya  Yuga,  (age) at  least  in  those  dim  centuries  which  immediate})'  succeeded the  composition  of  the  Atharvan.  Charaka,  too.  in  coi^nec- tion  with  his  discourse  on  the  development  of  the  foetal  body has  cited  the  opinion  of  Dhanvantaii  (ij  on  the  subject (tiie  same  as  promulgated  in  the  Sushruta  S'amhita)  & referred  his  disciples  to  the  Dhanvantari  school  of  surgeons (meaning  Sushruta  and  his  school)  in  cases  where  surgical aid  and  knowledge  are  necessary  ;  this  proves  that  Sushruta was  before  Charaka.
Sushruta  as  a  Surgeon : — Stishr'uta  was  emphatically  a '•'igeon,  and  the  Sushruta  Samhiti  is  the  only  complete 'ok  we  have  which  deals  with  the  problems  of  practi- )cal  surgery  and  midwifer}'.  Almost  all  the  other  Samhitas written  by  Sushruta's  fellow  students  are  either  lost  to  us, lor  are  but  imperfectly  preserved.  To  Sushruta  may  be  attri- buted the  glory  of  elevating  the  art  of  handling  a  lancet or  forceps  to  the  status  of  a  practical  science,  and  it  maj' not  be  out  of  place  here  to  give  a  short  history  of  the Ayurveda  as  it  was  practised  and  understood  in  Pre-^uhsrutic times  if  only  to  accentuate  the  improvements  which  he introduced  in  every  branch  of  medical  science.
Commentators  of  the  Sushruta  Samhita : — We  would be  guilty  of  ingratitude  if  we  closed  this  portion  of  our dissertation  without  expressing  a  deep  sense  of  our  obliga- tion to  Jejjada  Achiirya,  Gayadasa,  Bhaskara,  Madhava, Brahmadeva,  Dallana  and  Chakrapani  Datta,  the  celebrated commentators  and  scholiasts  of  the  Samhitd,  'ji'lio  have laboured  much  to  make  the  book    a   repository    of  priceless
(i)    ^^i'f*T?fTiaTqKfH  ^^^f^:  I
Charaka,  .Shariraslhiinam.  Chap.  \'.
I^Tt  EfTcT^T^Tt  ssit^'^^'I^^  II    '  ">
Charaka,  ChikitshSsth^nam.  Chap.  V.
xn  •  INTRODUCTION.
wisdom  ancf  experienge.     D'allana    has    made    use  of  all  the commentaries    in     revising     and     collating     the     texts     of .Sushruta  Samhita.
Origin  and  History  of  the  A  yurveda :  —In  the  science of  medicine,  as  in  all  other  branches  of  study,  the  ancient Aryans  claim  to  have  derived  their  knowledge  from  the gods  through  direct  revelation.  Su*shruta  in  his  Samhita has  described  the  Ayurveda  as  a  subdivision  (Upanga)  of  the Atharvan  (i),  while  according  to  others  the  science  of  the Ayurveda  has  its  origin  in  the  verses  of  the  Rik  Samhita (2).  Indeed  the  origin  of  the  science  is  lost  in  dim  anti- quity. Death  and  disease  there  had  been  in  the  world  since the  advent  of  man  ;  it  was  by  following  the  examples  of lower  animals  in  disease,  that  our  primitive  ancestors acquired  by  chance  the  knowledge  about  the  properties  of many  valuable  medicinal  drugs.  There  is  a  verse  in  the Rigveda  which  shows  that  the  lower  animals  were  the preceptors  of  man  in  matters  of  selecting  food  stuffs  and medicinal  simples  (3K  Individual  experiences  in  the  realms of  cure  and  hygiene  were  collected,  and  codified,  and  thus formed  the  bases  of  the  present  Ayurveda.  The  verses  in the  Vedas  clearly  mark  each  step  in  the  progress  of  medical knowledge.  The  properties  of  a  new  drug  were  always hymned  in  a  Vedic  verse  with  a  regularity  which  enables  us to  put  our  finger  upon  the  very  time  when  a  particular drug  of  our  Materia  Medica  first  came  to  be  of  service  of man  (4).
(i)     Sushruta  Samhita,  Sutrasthanam.   Ch.  I.  3.
(2)  ^jrC^^T^^i?  ^qt?:
Charana  ^^•uha  by  \^y5sa.
(3)  jitfwT^*  ^w(f[  I     ^?^^  «i»  I  ^^  I  ^a.
(4)  A.  ipc:  wii:  ^gfi'?Tt^5Tifn  It^r'^q^rd'T^  1
0
Atharvan  SamhitS U.      Sec  also  Ibid  I    2    II.  4.  7.  9.  25,  27  and  36.
INTRODUCTION.  ,  Xlil
Discrepancies  accounted'  for  : — Verses  q\i  medicine, hygiene,  and  surgery,  etc.  lie  scattered  throughout  the  four Vedas.  Those  having  bearing  on  Medicine  proper  occur most  in  the  Rigveda,  and  perhaps  it  was  for  this  reasoT^i  that Agnivesha,  who  was  a  physician,  has  ascribed  the^origin  of the  Ayurveda  to  revelations  in  the  Rik  Samhitd.  Precepts" relating  to  the  art  anu  practice  of  surgery  are  found  most  in the  Atharvan  (i),  which  amply  accounts  for  the  fact  of Sushruta's  opinion  of  holding  the  Ayurveda  as  a  subdivision of  the  Atharvan,  as  he  was  pre-eminentl}'  a  surgeon  himself. Different  kinds  of  physicians  :— Vedic  India,  like Ancient  Egypt,  recognised  the  principle  of  the  division  of labour  among  the  followers  of  the  healing  art.  There  were Shalya  Vaidyas  (surgeons),  Bhisaks  (physicians)  and  Bhisag- atharvans   (magic  doctors),    and    we  find  that  at  the  time  of
{  the  Mahabharatam,  which  nearly  approaches  the  age  of  our author,  the  number  of  the  sects  had  increased  to  five  which
J  were  named  as  Rogaharas  (physicians^  Shalyaharas  (sur- geons), Vishaharas  (poison  curers),  .  Krityaharas  (demon- doctors)  and  Bhisag-Atharvans  (2).
In  the  Vedic  age  (before  the  age  of  Sushruta)  physicians had  to  go  out  into  the  open  streets,  calling  out  for  patients (3^  They  lived  in  houses  surrounded  by  gardens  of medicinal  herbs.  The  Rigveda  mentions  the  names  of  a thousand  and  one  medicinal  drugs  (4).  Verses  eulogising the  virtues  of  water  as  an  all-healer,  and  of  certain  trees  and herbs  as  purifiers  of  the  atmosphere  are  not  uncommon  in  the Vedas.  Indeed  the  rudiments  of  Embryology,  Midwifery, child    management    (pediatrics)  and  sanitation  were    foimu-
(i)    ciwT?^Tre5nf^=^=^  '^]'^T\^  ?^Tf*ni5iTW^M  1
Rik  Samhitfi  I  M.  1 16-16. (2)     MahAbhdratam.  Shantiparva.  Rajadharmanu^hashan  Parv5dhydya.
(3)  ^cT'  f^^^^  I
Rigveda.  IX  M»  112.  ■>
(4)  sifT*  %  ^m^  fm^  ^^'^g^f^TT.    Rik.
XIV  INTROgDUCTION.
lated  in  thecage  of  the  Vedas  i^nd  Brahmanas,  and  we  shall present^'  see  how  from* these  scanty-  and  confused  materials Sushruta  created  a  science  and  a  Sanjhita  which  inv'ice  the ddmirs^.ion  of  the  world  even  after  thousands  of  years  of human  prc*gress.
Origin  of  A'yurvedic  Surgery  :  — In  India,  as  in  all other  countries,  curative  spells  and  hewing  mantras  preceded medicine  (i)  ;  and  the  first  man  of  medicirte  in  India  was a  priest,  a  Bhisag  Atharvan,  who  held  a  superior  position  to a  surgeon  in  society.  The  first  Aryan  setLlements  in  the Punjab  were  often  assailed  by  the  dark  aborigines  of  the country,  and  in  the  wars  .that  ensued  surgeons  had  fre-' quently  to  attend  to  the  Aryaa  chiefs  and  soldiery.  So  in the  Rigveda  (2)  we  find  that  legs  were  amputated  and replaced  by  iron  substitutes,  injured  eyes  were  plucked  out, and  arrow  shafts  were  extracted  from  the  limbs  of  the Aryan  warriors.  Nay  we  have  reasons  to  believe  that many  difficult  surgical  operations  were  successfully  per- formed, thougli  some  of  them  sound  almost  incredible. But  although  the  aid  of  surgery  was  constantly  sought for,  surgeons  were  not  often  allowed  to  mix  in  the Brahmanic  society  of  Vedic  India.  This  is  hinted  at  by our  author  when  he  says  that  it  was  during  the  wars  be tween  the  gods  and  demons  that  the  Ashvins,  the  surgeons of  heaven,  did  not  become  entitled  to  any  sacrificial  oblation till  they  had  made  themselves  eligible  for  it  by  uniting  the head  of  the  god  of  sacrifice  to  his  decapitated  body.  The story  of  the  progress  of  Ayurvedic  surgery  is  long  and  inter- esting, but  it    must    suffice    here  to    mention  that  with    the
(1)     Bedroe"s   Origin    of  the   Healing    Art,    and    Sir  John  Lubbock's Prehistoric  times,
(2)     ^^  5igi^i^?5l  f^aj^i^^ait  V%  f|fIWfT%  flsi^"*f'  II
t
•  «  »  *  »
Rik  Samhita  I  A.  8  Ad.  186  S.  116.   5.
INTRODUCTION.    '  XV
' '  > '
return  of  peace,  the  small  Aiynn  settlements  grew  in  number and  prosperit}-.  And  the  rich  Ar3'an  nobles  now  travelled  in stately  carriages,  and  as  there  were  constant  accidents  ihere  ■ arose  a  class  of  surgeons  who  exclusively  devoted  tlfemselves to  the  treatment  of  injured  animals.  The  surgeons,  now  no longer  required  in  camps  and  on  battle  fields,  had  to  attend on  the  rich  ladies  at  baronial  castles  during  parturition,  the magic  doctor  (Bhisag  Atharvan)  who  could  assuage  fever  and concoct  lo\e  potions  (i)  being  held  as  the  greatest  of  them all.  But  the  Vedic  Aryans  had  a  regular  armoury  against  pain and  suffering,  which  is  in  no  way  inferior  to  our  present day  Materia  Medica.  But  of  that  we  shall  speak  later  on in  connection  with  the  therapeutics  of  Sushruta.
The  scope  and  nature  of  Sushruta's  Surgery  :- So
rnuch  for  the  history  of  Vedic    Surgery.     It    is    in    the    Su-
(shruta  Samhita  that  we  first  come  across  a  systematic method  of  arranging  the  surgical  experiences  of  the  older surgeons,  and  of  collecting  the  scattered  facts  of  the  science ^fom  the  vast  range  of  Vedic  literature.  Sushruta  had  no desire  of  abandoning  the  Vedas  in  the  darkness  and  pushing en  an  independent  voyage  of  discovery.  The  crude  methods and  the  still  cruder  implements  of  incision  such  as,  bits  of glass,  bamboo  skins  etc.,  laid  down  and  described  in  the Samhita,  may  bj  the  relics  of  a  primitive  instrumentalogy which  tiiund  favour  vviih  our  ancestors  long  before  the hymnisation  of  any  Rik  verse.  Practical  surgery  requires a  good  knowledge  of  practical  anatomy.  The  quartered animals  at  the  Vedic  sacriiices  afforded  excellent  materials for  the  framing  of  a  comparative  anatomy  (2)'.  Sushruta devoted    his    whole   life  to  the  pursuit  of  surgery  proper,  to
Rik  Samhit5.  X  M.  145  S.  i. (2)     Vide  .^itareya  Br^hmana  I,  2.  II,  i±.  Ill,  37,
XVI  •  INTRODUCTION.
which  he  b/'ought  a  niyid  stored  with  luminous  analogies from  the  lower  animals.  It  was  he  who  first  classified  all ♦.surgical  operations  into  five  differe'nt  kinds,  and  grouped them  under  heads  such  as  Aharya  (extractions  of  solid bodies),  Bhedya  (excising),  Chhedya  (incising),  Eshya  (prob- ing), Lekhya  (scarifying),  Sivya  (suturing),  Vedhya  (punc- turing) and  Visravaniya  (evacuating  fluids).  The  surgery of  Sushruta  recognises  a  hundred  and  twenty-five  different instruments,  constructed  after  the  shape  of  beasts  and birds,  and  authorises  the  surgeon  to  devise  new  instruments according  to  the  exigencies  of  each  case.  The  qualifications and  equipments  of  a  surgeon  are  practically  the  sam*^  as are  recommended  at  the  present  time.  A  light  refresh- ment is  enjoined  to  be  given  to  the  patient  before  a  surgical operation,  while  abdominal  operations,  and  operations  m the  mouth  are  advised  to  be  performed  while  the  patient  is fasting.  Sushruta  enjoins  the  sick  room  to  be  fumigated with  the  vapours  of  white  mustard,  bdellium,  Nimva ' leaves,  and  resinous  gums  of  Shala  trees,  etc.,  which  fore- shadows the  antiseptic  ^bacilli)  theory  of  modern  times.  The number  of  surgical  implements  described  in  the  Samhita  is decidedly  small  in  comparison  with  the  almost  inexhaustible resources  of  western  surgery,  and  one  may  be  naturally  led to  suspect  the  au' henticity  of  the  glorious  achievements claimed  to  have  been  performed  by  the  surgeons  of  yore  ; but  then  their  kno  vledge  of  the  properties  and  virtues  of drugs  were  so  great  that  cases,  which  are  reckoned  as surgical  nowadays,  were  cured  with  the  help  of  medicines internally^pplied.  "Surgery,"  says  Tantram,  is  mutilation not  doctoring  (i).    It  should    only  be    employed    when    the
(l)  Aif^s^qfq*  f^5n  tf^  si«3f^^  ifT<qi^T  I
].\TKOI)lf?TIO.\,,  xvii
alTected  vital  energy  is  not  strcnig  enough  to  al^lie  effect  the cure  that  the  surgeon  is  justified  to  handle  his  kniYe.  We find  in  the  Samhita  that  ophthalmic,  obstetric  and  other operations  were  performed  with  the  utmost  skill  and caution.  '
Plastic  and  Rhinoplastic  Operations  :-  Doctor Hirschberg  of  Berlin  ^ys — "the  whole  plastic  surgery  in Europe  took  a  new  flight  when  these  cunning  devices of  Indian  workmen  became  known  to  us."  The  transplan- ting of  sensible  skin-flaps  is  also  an  entirely.  Indian  method (Sushruta,  Sutrasthanam,  Ch.  XV'I).  It  is  Sushruta  who first  successfully  demonstrated  tlie  feasibility  of  mending  a dipt  earlobe  with  a  patch  of  sensible  skin-flap  scraped  from the  neck  or  the  adjoining  part.
To  Sushruta  is  attributed  the  glory  of  discovering  the art  of  cataract-crouching  which  was  unknown  to  the  sur- '  geons  of  ancient  Greece  and  Egypt.  Limbs  were  amputated, abdominal  sections  were  performed,  fractures  were  set, dislocations,  hernia  and  ruptures  were  reduced,  hcemorrhoids rind  fistula  were  removed,  and  we  take  pride  in  saying  that the  methods  recommended  in  the  Sushruta  Samhita  some- times prove  more  successful  than  those  adopted  by  the surgeons  of  modern  Europe,  as  we  shall  have  occasion  to observe  later  on.  In  tho  case  where  the  intestines  are  injured, Sushruta  advises  that  "the  protruded  part  should  be  gently replaced  by  following  with  the  fingevP  A  surgeon  should enlarge    the    wound   in  it,  if  necessary,  by  means  of  a  knife.
"m^^  ^ffT  fTf%T^^  fm^-^  f^^ftg^  II
Mahanilatanlram,   Patola  X.  \'~..  72-74.
B.  See  the  Article  on  "Ileredily  and  some  of  its  Surgical  Aspects," By  F.  C.  Til/ell,  m.  d.  The  ^fediL»al  Advance  Vd.  LXIV.  June  iqo6. Page  357.
\
X
xviii  j\TkMfnnrT[o\,
•• In  the  cas%  where  the  intestine  is  severed,  the  severed parts  s'hoLild  be  held  together  by  applying  living  black ants  to  •  their  ends.  Then  their  bodies  should  be  cut  off Teaviifg  only  the  heads  to  serve  the  same  purpose  which in  moderrt  improved  European  surgery  an  animal  tissue  like catgut  is  expected  to  4'ulfill.  After  this  the  intestine  should be  fairly  replaced  in  the  abdominal  Ct^-ity  and  the  external opening  stitched  and  properly  dressed.  We  abstain  here from  a  lengthy  description  of  the  different  methods  recom- mended by  the  Sushruta  in  cases  of  abdominal  and peritoneal  wounds.  We  only  ask  our  readers  to  compare this  Chapter  (II  Chikitsa^thaTiam)  of  the  Sushruta  Samhita with  the  Chapter  in  anv  work  on  European  chirurgery whicli  deals  with  the  same  subject.  Certain  medicinal plasters  were  used  to  be  applied  to  localise  the  shafts  of  arrows embedded  in  the  limbs  of  wounded  soldiers  and  their  exact locations  were  ascertained  from  the  inflammation  caused bv  the  application  of  such  a  plaster  with  a  precision  which would  be  sometimes  welcome  even  in  these  days  of  Rontgen rays.
Lithotomic  Operations  :  -In  these  cases,  elaborate instructions  have  been  given  for  making  the  perineal incision,  as  well  as  about  the  care  and  general  management of  the  patient  after  the  operation.  In  a  case  of  Shukra- shmari  (seminal  or  spermatic  concretion)  the  forma- tion and  existence  of  which  have  been  verv  recentlv discovered  bv  English  pathologists,  Sushruta  enjoins  that the  stone,  if  in  the  urethra,  should  be  removed  with  the help  of  Anyvdsanam  and  urethral  enematas,  failing  which the  penis  should  be  cut  open  and  the  concretion  extracted with  the  help  of  a  hook.  Kavinij  I'mesii  Chandra  (Jupla in  the  introduction  to  his  Vaidyaka  Shavda-Sindhu  remarks, that  he  and  !>,  Durgddasa  Gupta  M.  B.  translated  the Chapters  on  lithotomic  operations  and  instrumental  parturi- tion «f  the  Susbrufa  Samhita  for  the  perusal  of  Dr  Charles, the    then    Principal    of     the     Medical     College,     Calcutta.
rNTRODUCTlON.  XIX
t  >
■-»
''Dr.    Charles    highly    praised    the    pvocess    ot    clelivt^ry     in difficult  ca^es  and  even    coijfessed    I  hat    with    all    his   great experience    in    midwifery    and    surgery    he    never    hdi}  any idea    of   the    like    heing  found  in  all  the  medical  \\;orks  that came  under  his  observation."
Amputation  : — Amputation^  were  freely  made  and medicated  wines,  were  given  to  the  patients  as  anccsthe- tics  (i).  These  conclusivelv  show  thai  the  surgery  of Sushruta  does  not  rest  content  with  the  mere  bursting  or opening  of  an  abscess,  and  the  healing  of  the  incidental wound,  but  lays  down  processes  for  major  operations  as  well. The  removal  of  the  cicatrix  until  it  becomes  of  the  same colour  with  the  surrounding  skin  and  the  growth  of  hair thereon  are  suggestions  which  we  find  nowhere  else.
Ophthalmic  Surgery  : — Of  the  seventy  six  varieties  of ophthalmic  diseases.  Sushruta  holds  that  fifty-one  are  surgical OP*-"  Tra  Tantram  Ch.  Vlllu  The  mode  of  operation  which is  tV'  be  performed  in  each  case  has  been  elaborately  de- scribed in  the  Samhita,  and  does  not  unfavourably  compare in  most  instances  with  modern  methods  of  ophthalmic surgery.  Sushruta  was  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  angle  of veHection  is  equal  to  the  angle  of  incidence,  and  that  the same  ray  which  impinges  upon  the  retina  serves  the  double purpose  of  illumining  the  eye  and  the  external  world,  and is  in  itself  converted  into  the  sensation  of  light.
Midwifery  : — It  is  in  the  region  of  practical    midwifery
that  one  becomes  so  much  impressed  with  the  greatness    of
Sushruta.  The  different  turning,  flexing,  gliding  movements,
the  application  of  the  forceps  in  cases  of  difficult  la1:)our    and
other    obstetric    operations    in\uiving    the    deslructioJi    and
mutilation    of   the    child,    such    as    craniotomy,    were     iirsl
systematically     described    in    the    Subhiuta     Sauihitd    lung
before    fillets    and    forceps   were    dreamt    of  in  Europe,  and
thousands  of  years  before  the  birth  uf  Christ.    Sushruta,  who
<  }
(i)      For  llie  use  of  .Sanmohinis   (an,Teslheiics)  for  surgical  purposes,   sec
Hhoia  Prabandlia  \>v  I'.allAla  T'andil.
XX  » INTKOnUCTION.
advocates  Clesarean  se^nion  iri  hopeless  cases  of  obslruclion, lays  down  that  the  instrument  should  be  employed  only  in ♦those  cases  where  the  proportion  between  the  child  and  the maternal  passage  is  so  defective  that  medicated  plasters, fumigations,  etc..  are  not  sufficient  to  effect  a  natural  delivery. His  directions  regarding  the  management  of  the  puerperal state,  lactation  and  management  of  the  chijd  and  the  choice of  a  wet-nurse  are  substantial!}- the  same  as  are  found  in modern  scientific  works  of  European  authors.  A  feeling  of pride  and  joy  moves  our  heart  when  we  contrast  these glorious  achievements  of  our  ancestors  with  the  meanness  of results  which  modern  Europe  has  gained  in  this  department of  midwifer}-.  In  those  old  days  perhaps  there  were  no hospitals  to  huddle  patients  together  in  the  same  room  and therebv  to  create  artificiallv  septicemic  poisons  which  are now  so  common  and  so  fatal  in  lying-in  rooms.  A  ne^-'^' built  Iving-in  room  in  an  open  space  abunduntly  suf^s-ea  J with  the  rays  of  the  sun  and  heat  of  the  burning  f^ie  for each  individual  case,  the  recommendation  of  a  fresh bamboo-chip  for  the  section  of  the  cord  are  suggestions the  value  of  which  the  west  has  yet  to  learn  from the  east.
Dissection  :--Sushruta,  himself  a  practical  surgeon,  was the  first  to  advocate  dissection  of  dead  bodies  as  indispen- sable for  a  successful  student  of  Surgery.  The  Paritschittas  of ancient  Egypt  perhaps  learnt  their  art  from  the  Purusachettas (Dissector)  of  ancient  India.  With  a  candour  less  common among  western  scholars  Dr.  Wise  observes  that,  ''the Hindu  philosophers  undoubtedly  deserve  the  credit  of  having, though  opposed  bv  strong  preiudire,  entertained  sound  and philosophical  views  respecting  the  uses  of  the  dead  to  the living,  and  were  the  first  scientific  and  successful  cultivator? of  the  most  important  and  essential  of  all  the  departments  of medical  knowledge,  practical  anatomy".  A  bungling  burgeon is  a  public  danger  and  Sushiuta  savs  iliat,  "theorv  without practice  is  like  a  onc-wingetl  bird  that  is  incapable  of  flight".
lNTK01)UCT!(ON.  XXI
■»
>  >
Study  of  Practical  Surgery  :— To  give  effii-iency  in surgical  operations,  the  pupils  of  Dhan^antari(Sushruta  etc.) were  asked  to  try  their  knives  repeatedly  first  on  natural and  artificial  objects  resembling  the  diseased  parts  ofv>  the body  before  undertaking  an  actual  operation.  Incision,  for example,  was  practised  on  Pushpafala  /cucerbeta  maxima), Alavu  (Longenaris  Vulgaris)  or  Trapusha  (cucmis  pubescuas), evacuating  on  leatfier  bags  full  of  water  and  on  the  urinary bladders  of  dead  animals,  scarification  on  the  hides  of animals  on  which  the  hair  was  allowed  to  remain.  Venesec- tion was  practised  on  the  vessels  of  dead  animals  and  on  the stalks  of  the  water-lily  :  the  art  .of  stuffing  and  probing  on bamboo  reeds  etc.  :  extraction  of  solid  bodies  on  Panasa (Artocarpus  Integrifolia)  and  such  like  fruit,  scraping  on wax  spread  on  a  Shalmali  (Bombox  Malabaricum)  plank, and  suturing  on  pieces  of  cloth,  skin  or  hide.  Ligaturing and  bandaging  were  practised  on  dummies,  cauterisation (both  actual  and  potential  )  on  pieces  of  flesh,  and  cathe- terisation  on  unbaked  earthen  vessels  filled  with  water. It  is  almost  with  a  feeling  of  wonder  we  hear  him  talk  of extirpation  of  uterine  excrescences  and  discourse  on  the necessity  of  observing  caution  in  surgically  operating  upon uterine  tumours  (Raktarvudai.  These  facts  should  be borne  in  mind  as  thev  would  help  us  a  good  deal  in  account- ing for  the  numerous  anomalies  that  are  to  be  found  in the  anatomical  portions  of  the  Samhita.
Study  of  Practical  Anatomy  :— We  have  stated  be- fore that  tb.e  quartered  sacrificial  animals  afforded excellent  materials  for  the  framing  of  comparative  anatomy. The  Aitareya  Brahmana  contains  special  injunction  for  the quartering  of  such  animals  (i)  and  we  are  told  that  the preceptors   availed    themselves   of  the  religious  meetings  to
(i)  The  Ailaicya  Firaliniana  describes  a  )iaitirular  wav  of  tlividini; the  orgaas  and  viscera  of  the  sirriticjjil  animals  'wliich  was  kepi 'secret among  the  priesls.  Aitareya  Brahmana  VIII.    i.
XXII  INIROniJCTIOX.
<
deinonslrjiLe  the  lessons  ou^  practical    anatomy.     We   come
I. acrosj;  such  terms  as  the    heart,    stomach,    brain,    intestines,
anus,  liver,  spleen,  uterus  etc',  iv  the  Rigveda,  and  the *'  Aitaj-e3'a  Brdhmana  (i).  There  is  an  entire  h\inn  (Rik) devoted*  to  the  subject  and  treatment  of  Phthisis  ( Knja Yakshma)  which  becomes  utterly  unintelligible  in  the absence  of  an  accurate  knowledge  about  the  structure  of lungs,  and  mechanism  of  the  human  heart.  The  Vtdic Arya  fully  understood  the  resultant  nature  of  the  human organism.  The  Rik  Mantra,  which  to  this  day  is  recited  on the  occasion  of  a  funeral  ceremony,  ampl}'  testifies  to  the  fact that  he  used  to  look  upon  his  mortal  frame  as  the  product of  the  combination  of  the  five  physical  elements  (2). He  understood  the  effects  of  different  drugs  upon  diges- tion and  the  office  which  the  tendons,  muscles,  flesh and  nerves,  etc.  respectively  serve  in  the  economy.  It  is in  the  Sushruta  Samhita  that  we  find  a  systematic  attempt at  arranging  together  the  facts  of  anatomical  observation. The  age  of  Sushruta,  the  Acharyic  age  of  the  Ayurveda, was  a  period  of  scientific  investigation.  The  sturd}-  Aryan colonists  exchanged  their  simple  mode  of  living  for  luxuiy and  ease.     The  number  of   general   diseases  was  great.      Jn
( 1 )  A.     fT^T  ^^^  f ?gjnri:«3  f^fsffTTiRii
Rik  Samhita  \'.    \'II,    I, -'3, 538.
H.     \ide  also  .Ailareya  BrShmana  I  2.   II  12.  Ill  37.
(2)  The  iialuie  of  the  huiiiaii  body  as  tile  resulting  efi'ect  of  tlie  C(im- hinatidii  dftlu'  live  elementals  havcheen  clearly  described  in  the  verse.
^Tqt'TTiI^  qf?  era  n  f%rT?ft^y'l«I^  wfaf^VTTSlf  1»:  I
*  Rik  Samhita  X  M.  16  S.  3.
Which  l)eing  translated  reads  :—  Let  his  eye  go  t(j  the  sun,  let  his  breath- wind  nVx  with  the  wind'of  the  atmosphere,  and  to  the  sky.  earth  and  the cereals  the  parts  which  ha\e  spriint;  out  of  them.  Cvc.
ixTR'onurTioN.     »  XX  111
vain  did  the  holy  Narada  (i)  ^reacl]  the  gospd  of  plain living  and  high  thinking,  and  exhort  them,  like  Cato, to  return  to  their  simpl'e  mode  of  life.  The  long  peace brought  opulence  in  its  train  and  wealth  begot  indolence and  disease.  Men  like  Bharadvaja,  Angira,  Yamadagni, Atreya,  Gautama,  Agastya,  Vdmadeva',  Kapisthala,  Asa- marthya,  Bhargava,  Kusliika,  Kdpya,  Kashyapa,  Sharkara- ksha,  Shaunaka,  Manmathayani,  Agnivesha,  Charaka, Sushruta,  Narada,  Pulastya,  Asita,  Chyavana,  Paingi  and Dhaumya  etc.  began  to  write  Samhitas.  Each  hermitage  was a  College  of  Ayurveda,  and  the  empirical  method  of  investi- gation was  introduced  into  each  department  of  the  science of  cure.
Anatomical  Anomalies  in  the  Samhita :— Having got  so  far  in  our  analysis,  before  passing  on  to  the  study  of the  Anatomical  portion  of  the  Sushruta  Samhita,  we  must try  to  account  for  the  many  anomalies  and  discrepancies that  have  crept  into  or  have  been  suffered  to  remain  in  the present  recension  of  the  book.  Take,  for  example,  the  line in  which  Dhanvantari  is  made  to  speak  of  three  hundred bones  in  the  human  organism.  It  is  impossible  that  the human  frame,  in  so  short  a  time,  has  got  rid  of  so  many  of of  its  skeletal  accessories  simply  through  disuse,  or  because of  their  becoming  superfluous  in  the  altered  condition  of  its environments.  More  absurd  is  it  to  think  that  Sushruta, who  discards  all  authority  except  the  testimony  of  positive knowledge,  would  write  a  thing  which  none  but  the  blind would  believe  in  a  dissecting  room.  The  spirit  of  the  a^re ill  which  he  flouri:>lied  piecliided  the  possibility  oT^  such  an crrnr.
Anomalies  accounted  for  :  -In  ancient  India,  subjects chosen  for  the  demonstration  of  practical  anatomy  were always  children  (2),  and  naturally  those  bones,  which  are (i)     Vide  Aitann'a  Br5hmana  VII.  13.
(2)  The  injunction  of  ihe  Hindu  Sllasiras  is  ihat  '-corpse  of  persons more  than  2  years  old  should  he  burned."     Cremation  of  dead  bodies  bein"
xxi\-  f       (\'^Roi)rc~Ti().\.
fused  or''«'inaslon"iised  inlo'one  whole  durine:  adult  life,  have been'  separately  enumerated — a  circumstance  which  may, to  some  extent,  account  for  th'e  excess  in  the  number  of bon'es  described  in  this  Samhita  (i).  Likewise  the  theory  that Sushrula  might  have  included  the  teeth  and  the  cartilages within  the  list  of  s'iveletal  bones  comes  very  near  the  truth, but  It  does  not  reflect  the  whole  trtith  either.  The  fact  is that  the  orignial  Sushruta  Samhita  has  passed  through several  recensions  ;  and  we  have  reasons  to  believe  that  the present  one  by  Nagarjuna  is  neither  the  only  nor  the last  one  made.  The  redactors,  according  to  their  own  light, have  made  man\-  in'terpbLitions  in  the  text,  and  when Brahmanas,  thev  have  tried  to  come  to  a  sort  of  compromise at  points  of  disagieement  with  the  teachings  of  the  Vedas  12). Therefore  it  is  that  we  come  across  such  statements  in  the Samhita  as  ''there  are  360  bones  in  the  human  body,  ;-|0 it  is  in  the  Vedas,  but  the  science  of  surgery  recognises  three hundred  skeletal  bones."  What  lends  a  greater  colour  to  the hypothesis  is  that  Sushruta,  who,  in  the  Chapter  on  Marma Shariram,  has  so  accurately  described  the  unions  of  bones and  ligaments,  anastomoses  of  nerves,  veins  and  arteries  etc.,
obligatory  on  Government,  ;is  well  as  on  private  individuals,  it  was  almost impossible  to  secure  a  full-grown  anatomical  subject  in  I'auranic  India, the  more  so  when  we  consider  that  the  Hindus  look  upon  the  non-crema- tion and  mutilation  oi  a  corpse  vvilii  a  peculiar  horror  as  it  prevents  the spirit  from  purging  off  its  uncleanness  in  the  funeral  fire,  and  bars  ilf access  to  a  higher  spiritual  life.  Naturally  in  later  and  more  cere- moniil  times  the  interred  corpses  of  infants,  less  than  2  \ears  old,  had to  be  unearthed  and  dissected  for  anatomical  purposes  ;  and  these  portions of  the  Sushruta  SamliitS  might  have  been  modified  by  the  subsequent commentators  in  order  to  conform  them  to  occular  proofs.— T.  R.
(i)  See  Tiray's  Anatomy  {1897)  p.  2S8  and  301  Figs.  248  and  262.
(2)    "'?f^T*fgtw;  vi?i':  ^^rfij^:  ^T^?nf"  1"
\ishnu  Smriti.      Ch,  96.  55. (,'haraka.  Shfiriraslli^nani.
INTRODUCMON.     ,  XXV
must  have  described  their  courszs  and  locations,  a,L?  otherwise it  would  have  been  quite  impossible  for  practical  suigeons, for  whom  it  was  intended,  to  conform  to  the  directions  of  the Samhita  in  surgically  operating  on  their  patients'  limbs^,  and to  avoid  those  vulnerable  unions  or  anastomoses  as"'enjo'ned therein.  These  Marmas  have  been  'divided  into  three classes  such  as,  the  Sadya-prana-hara  :  Kala-pnina-hara, and  Vaikalya-kara,  according  as  an  injur}'  to  any  of  them proves  instantaneously  fatal,  or  fatal  in  course  of  time,  or is  followed  b}-^  a  maimed  condition  of  the  limb  concerned. The  fact  is  that  the  study  of  practical  Anatomy  was  in  a manner  forbidden  in  the  reig>n  of  Ashoka  Pij-adarshi inasmuch  as  ail  religious  sacrifices  were  prohibited  by  a royal  edict  (i),  and  the  subsequent  commentators  (who were  also  redactors  on  a  small  scale)  of  the  Sushruta ■jSamhita,  in  the  absence  of  any  positive  knowledge  on  the subject,  had  to  grope  their  way  out  in  darkness  as  best they  could  ;  hence,  this  wanton  mutilation  of  texts  and hopeless  confusion  of  verses  in  the  Sharira  Sthanam  of  the present  day  Sushruta  Samhita,  which  should  be  re-arranged and  restored  to  their  proper  chapters  before  any  definite opinion  can  be  pronounced  on  the  anatomical  knowledge of  the  holy  Sushruta.
Sushruta  as  a  Biologist  •.  —  h^  the  tirst  chapter of  his  Sh.irira  Sthanani,  Sushruta  discusses  the  question. what  is  man,  wherein  lies  his  individualit v,  why  does he  come  into  being,  why  does  he  die  at  all  ?  Like all  Indian  philosophers,  Sushruta  argues  the  question down  from  the  universe  to  man.  The  factors  or  laws, that  govern  the  evolution  of  the  universe  in  its  phy- sical aspect,  are  extended  to  cover  the  evolution  of  the physical  aspect  of  man  (organic  evolution).  There  is  but one  law  and  one  force  which  run  through -the  three  plains of  mind,  matter  and  spirit.     Physiology,  that    fails  to    loc^k
(l)      fournal  of  ihe  .\siiiUc  Society  i.f  CulciUla  \'n\.  \'U.      P.  26f.
XXvi  INTRODUCTION.
<•
into  the  iKiLure  of  life  and  iU  background  and  tries  to  ex- plain  t-.iway  thib  intelligent,  living  force  as  the  product  of chemiQal  action  of  the  organ'ic  cells,  is  no  Physiology  at all.  '.Cell  is  not  life,  but  there  is  life  in  a  cell.  Cells  may  be called  the  true  bearers  of  li-fe.  Dr.  Weismann  insists  that  it is  more  correct  to  sppak  of  the  continuity  of  the  general protoplasm  than  of  "the  germ  ceils."  Professors  Geddes and  Thomson  observe  that,  "the  bodies  are  but  the  torches which  burn  out,  while  the  living  flame  has  passed  through- out the  organic  series  unextinguished.  The  bodies  are  the leaves  which  fall  in  dying  from  the  continuously  growing branch.  Thus  although  deafh  take  inexorable  grasp  of  the individual,  the  continuance  of  the  life  is  still  in  a  deep  sense unaffected  ;  the  reproductive  elements  (cells)  have  already claimed  their  protozoan  immortality,  are  already  recreating a  new  body.'"  But  to  invest  these  reproductive  cells  with immortality,  and  to  deny  the  same  to  the  individual  self, which  directs  and  controls  these  protoplasms,  and  is  before and  behind  them,  is  like  the  statement  of  Prof.  Huxlev when  he  admits  the  chance  of  the  physical  transmigration of  the  organic  constituents  of  the  human  body,  and  yet denies  the  possibility  of  an  individual  self  continuing  in  any other  form.  "It  is  sensibility,"  observes  Sushruta,  "that precedes  the  senses  ;  and  self,  the  sensibility  proceeds  from the  self  to  which  all  such  conditions  are  referred  as  mine."
Sushruta's  Theory  of  Cosmogony  is  based  on  the
old  S;inkhya  Duality  of  Prakriti  (Objective)  and  Purusha (Subjective).  The  two  are  coeval  and  co-extensive  realities. Out  of  the  Avyakta  (unmanifest)  or  Prakriti  has  evolved the  Mahai,  the  (inimatcd  cosmic  matter.  Out  of  this cosmic  matter  has  evolved  Ahamk;ira  (the  sense  of  indivi- dualit\-  or  more  correctly  egoism)  which  is  divided into  thrt-e  kinjs  such  as  the  Vaikarika  (phenomenal, ihought-fornii,  Taijasa  (kinetic),  and  Bhut;idi  (pertaining In  il^e  first  form  of  matter).  This  \'"aik;irika  Ahamkara in   combination   with  the    Taijasa    Ahamkara    has    fathered
iNTRonurfioN.    >  xxvii
1.1
the  eleven  sense  organs,  whith.  in  combinatiqii  with  the Bnutadi,  have  produced  the  five  Tanmatras  or  {iroper sensibles  of  touch,  sight,  ^  hearing,  etc.  The  material principles  of  sound,  light,  taste,  smell,  etc.,  are  biJ't  the modifications  of  these  five  Tanmatras,  of  which'*  Akisha (ethereon),  Vayu  (ether),  light,  and  soui-^d,  etc.  are  the  grosser forms.  In  other  wordfl,  these  Tanmatras  may  he  defined as  the  atomic  essences  of  the  material  principles  of  sound, light,  ether,  etc.  In  addition  to  these,  Sushruta,  Hke Kapila,  admits  the  existence  of  a  kind  of  atom-like  units of  consciousness,  which  he  calls  Purusha.  The  combination of'  the  sixteen  aforesaid  categories  and  the  Purusha  is for  the  expansion  and  liberation  of  the  latter.  A  human being  (individual),  who  is  the  fit  subject  for  medical treatment,  is  the  product  of  the  combination  of  Purusha with  the  five  primordial  material  principles  (iMahabhutas). The  Purushas,  real  selves  of  beings,  the  sources  of their  vital  energy,  and  the  controllers  and  directors  of all  organic  or  mental  actions,  are  extremely  subtile  in  their essence,  and  manifest  themselves  onlv  through  the combination  of  the  seed  (paternal  element)  or  ovum (maternal  element).  It  is  the  Karma  (dynamics  of  acts done  by  a  person  in  a  prior  existence)  which  deterinines the  nature  of  the  body  it  will  be  clothed  with,  as wcii  cts  che  nat'Te  of  the  womb  it  shall  be  conceived  in, in  its  next  incarnation.
Nature  of  Self  :  —  v^; elf  is  a  simple  substance,  and,  as such,  is  immaterial.  Force  is  substance  and  substance,  is force.  It  is  endued  with  constructive  intelligepce,  and, like  gravitation  or  cohesion,  can  permeate  a  material  body, without,  in  any  way,  disturbing  h.  It  is  adaptative  or elective,  or,  in  other  words,  elects  that  kind  of  selves  for its  parents  as  are  best  suited  to  the  purposes*  of  its  being. Man  is  the  outcome  of  an  influx  of  a  se.f,  a  force,  a  dynamis with  its  path  determined  by  the  dynamics  of  the  d^jeds of  its   prior    existence.     To    think    that  vitality  starts  from
xxviii  ,    iNTifoniTCTioN.
•• protoplastfv  is  insanity.  Cimemically  examined  protoplasm is  but',  C,  O,  H,  N  anci  S.  But  no  amount  of  C,  O,  H,  N afid  S  put  together  will  constit<ite  life.  The  idea  that life 'iias  nothing  prior  to  it,  that  the  force  which  controls the  co-ordination  of  man's  economy  perished  with  the  death of  his  organism,  is'quite  puerile.  Life  is  expansion  and not  creation,  and,  as  such,  is  linked  to  those  unseen realities  which  constitute  its  prior  and  future  selves.  We see  only  the  middle  link  in  the  chain  of  existence  which we  call  life,  but  take  no  notice  of  the  preceding  or  succeeding ones  which  are  invisible  (i).  The  grosser  material  body is  linked  to  a  finer,  imma<;erial  one,  in  as  much  as  nothing can  exist  vvithout  being  attached  to  its  antecedent.  So at  each  conception  there  is  the  influx  of  a  new  self,  for the  lifeless  constituents  of  a  human  body  can  not  create a  man,  no  matter  how  many  chemical  or  physiological actions  may  be  postulated  to  run  to  their  rescue.
Ayurvedic  Embryology  :  — Before  entering  into  the discussion  of  Sushruta's  tiieory  of  conception,  we  shall  take a  little  more  trouble  to  enunciate  fully  the  Vedic  theories on  the  subject.  "The  child  is  the  fruit  of  the  combination of  sperm  and  ovum"  (2'.  It  lies  with  its  head  downward inside  the  uterus,  a  fact  which  facilitates  its  passage  out  of, and  protects  its  form  from  the  effects  of  anv  injur}'  done  to that    viscus.   (3)     The    eyes    of   the    child    a-y    ..n^finrtltTi'',
Bhagavat  Gita  II.  28.
(2)    ^f  ^wic^t  ^ra:  ';^»j]3R^5i'^^f^:  1
Astanga  llridayam  (Vagbhat) c  ShArira  SthSnam.     Ch,  I.  i.
«  *  *  ^    r\^Tf[  ^'^^Vh  ?clT  1
'  *  Aiteriya  Brahmana  \'I.  ic    g(^
introduct?oa.     i  xxix
1.1
as  the  cephalic  portion  of  the  feJal  body  is  tirst  ,».1eveloped. The  factors,  which  are  essential  to  the  developme'nt  of the  fetal  hody,  from  the  time  of  fecundation  to  the 'ippearance  of  the  characteristic  sense-organs,  have  '^een described  in  a  verse  of  the  Rig  Veda  (i).  In  thfe  Vedic mythology  each  organic  function  is 'consecrated  to  the tutelage  of  a  presiding^'  deity,  and  a  Vedic  Aryan  loves to  call  a  thing  oftener  by  the  name  of  its  divine  custodian than  by  that  of  its  own.  Rightly  translated,  the  verse would  read  as  follows  :  — "May  Vishnu  (the  presiding deity  of  ether  and  nerve  force)  expand  thy  uterus,  may Tvashta  (the  presiding  deity  'of  heat  and  metabolism) bring  about  the  full  differentiation  of  the  limbs  and  the sex  of  the  foetus,  may  Prajapati  (the  presiding  deity  of the  ovum)  sprinkle  thy  uterus,  and  mayst  thou  conceive through  the  blessing  of  the  lortl  of  human  destiny.  May Snrasvati  (goddess  of  intellect)  and  the  Ashvins,  the surgeons  f>1'  the  gods  (the  |iresiding  deity  of  fission,  etc.) help  thee  in  taking  the  seed."  Now,  the  development  of the  fetal  body  takes  place  after  the  pattern  of  its  father's species,  and  this  conformity  to  the  pattern  of  its  species represents  an  act  of  intellection.  Hence,  the  aid  of  the goddess  of  intellect  has  been  invoked  with  that  of  the celestial  surgeons,  who  preside  over  the  process  of cell-division,  so  essential  to  the  formation  of  the  fetal limbs.      Divested    of   its    allegory,    the    verse     would    mean
(i)     f^^?itf^  ^^?tg,  ^^T^qTt%  f^sig  I
JTwf  ^f%  f^5?t^T#,  w  ^f?  T?:«^frr  I
rf  Tf  5fIW  ^WlH'i  ^^fT  *?Tffl  fl^f?^  II
'  Rik  Samhila  X,  M.  184,  S.
XXX  t      INTfionUCTION.
that  the  •§perm  led  into  a  healthy  and  well-developed uteru5  through  the  agency  of  the  Vayu  (increased  activity of  the-^  local  nerves)  meets  the  'maternal  element  (ovum) in  tViat  viscus.  Then  the  impregnated  matter  undergoes a  process  of  fission,  and  takes  shape  after  the  pattern  of its  father's  species.  •  When  we  think  of  so  many  idle speculations  as  regards  the  proces%  of  fertilisation,  which obtained  credence  so  late  as  the  beginning  of  the  i8th century  in  Europe,  and  the  controversies  that  arose between  the  Ovists,  Performists  and  Animalculists  (i),  we cannot  help  regretting  that  the  Ayurvedic  Embryology, which  started  under  such  h'appy  auspices,  could  not  fully solve  the  problem  of  fertilisation  even  before  the  advent of  the  Tantrik  age.  The  fundamental  principles  with which  the  Embryology  of  the  Acharyayas  (Sushruta, Dhanvantari,  etc.)  was  started  are  substaritially  the  same as  have  now  been  discovered  by  the  researches  of  the Western  workers.  Sushruta  in  his  dissertation  on  the subject  showed  the  illegitimacy  which  lay  at  the  root  of  his predecessor's  theory  (  Sharirasthanam  Chap.  II.  )  and  took up  research  exactlv  where  the  Vedic  Rishis  had  left  off. He  clearly  demonstrated  the  fact  thai  "by  a  physiological process  known  as  Rasapika  (metabolism)  the  hmph  chyle is  metamorphosed  into  sperm  in  men,  or  into  ovum  in women,  in  the  course  of  a  month.  The  catamenial  fluid is  carried  down  into  the  uterus  through  its  proper  ducts. The  sperm  or  ovum  is  thus  the  quintessence  of  a  man's or  a  woman's  body.  The  sperm  meets  the  ovum  (Artavam) in  the  ute;-us,  which  resembles  a  lotus-bud  in  shape,  and whose  aperture  is  shut  up  with  a  mucous  deposit  as soon  as  fecundation  takes  place.  The  most  favourable time  for  fecundation  is  between  the  fourth  and  twelfth day  after  the  af)pearance  of   the    flow    (Garbhakala)"  as   has
(»)    For  a  short  history  of  tlie  Theories  of  Fertilisation,  Vide  Evolution of  Sex  (Prof.  P.  Geddes  and  J.  A.  Thompson)  Chap.  XII.  pp.  169— 171.
JNTRODUCT?0\.       >  XXXI
I' I
been    lately    demonstrated    by   'the     researches  ''of     Prof. Von  Ott.  (I).
Sexual  Diamorphism  :— Some  light  is  thrown  on  the relative  preponderance  of  the  sperm  and  ovum  in  the  Birth of  a  female  child.  "When  the  maternal  element  prepon- derates the  child  is  female  ;  when  the  'fraternal  element  is stronger  the  child  is  malfe.  When  both  the  elements  are equal,  the  child  is  of  no  sex.'"  In  theory  at  least  Sushruta admits  the  possibility  of  the  birth  of  many  children  at  a single  conception.  "When  the  seed  is  divided  into  two  by its  inherent  force  (Vayu),  twins  are  born  in  the  womb" — a statement  which  points  to  the 'irresistible  conclusion  that multiplicity  of  birth  is  the  outcome  of  the  multifarious fission  of  the  seed  in  the  womb  under  certain  abnormal conditions.  Sushruta  gives  a  reason  for  believing  that,  in exceptional  circumstances,  and  without  sexual  union,  the unfertilised  ovum  may  give  rise  to  perfect  oflTspring,  thus giving  a  prevision  of  the  modern  theory  of  parthenogenesis. Pathological  parthenogenesis  has  occasionally  been  noticed in  higher  animals.  Oellacher  has  noted  this  in  respect of  hen's  eggs,  and  Janosik  has  observed  it  in  the  ovarian  ova of  many  mammals  such  as  the  guinea-pig,  etc. (2)  Sushruta extends  the  probability  to  the  human  ova  under  certain conditions.  He  admits  the  possibility  of  conception without  the  admixture  of  the  male  germinal  element, though  he  observes  that  like  all  asexual  genesis"  the development  dots  not  proceed  far  in  the  case."  From such  a  hypothesis  it  is  but  one  step  to  the  theory  which enunciates  the  possibility  of  conception  withou?  proper sexual  union.
But  to  understand    his  theory  of  sexual  diamorphism,  it
(1)  Vide  ihe  chari  of  menstrual  wave    prepared  by    V*n   Ou    given    in ilan  and  Woman '(Havelock  and  Ellis)  Chap.  XL
(2)  The  Evolution  of  Sc.k  Ch.  XIII.  P.  1S5.  ,
rn>/.  p.  r,eihlclfn,(}  J.  A,   Thnmps.m.
XXxii  «-      INI^RODUCTION.
t  •
is  necessary  thai  on^shouFd  fully  compreliend  the  meaning of  such  Ayuryedic  terms  on  the  subject  as  Ichchha  Shakli (will-force).  Shukra-Vahulyam  (\)  (preponderance  of  the male  reproductive  element)  and  Shonita-Vahulyam  (prepon- derance of  the  female  reproductive  element)  etc.  Sushruta, in  common  with  'the  Brahmanic  philosophers  of  Ind, believed  that  distinction  of  sex  h'as  evolved  from  a  pri- mordial hermaijhroditism.  Manu  in  his  Institutes  has emphasised  the  fact  (2),  though  in  a  highly  poetic  style. He  observes  that  "the  Purusha  (Logos),  by  a  stroke  of  Will, divided  its  body  (animated  cosmic  matter)  into  two,  one of  which  was  male,  and  the  other  female."  The  Tantra says  that,  ''the  male  part  was  endued  with  an  energy (force)  of  its  own,  which  is  called  Pitrika  Shaktl  ;  and  the corresponding  female  part,  with  the  one,  which  is  called Matrika  Shakti.  Pitrika  Shakti  is  a  disruptive  force  ; •Matrika  Shakti  is  a  constructive  energy.  Though  the conception  of  force  in  Sanskrit  sciences  is  but  partially physical,  the  nearest  approach  to  the  connotations  of  the Pitrika  and  Matrika  Shakti  is  made  by  the  terms  Ana- bolism  and  KatabolisiU  of  the  Western  physiologists. Sanskrit  physiology  recognises  the  two  opposite  poles  of vital  force  in  a  living  organism,  and  has  not  taken inconsiderate  pains  to  determine  their  exact  locations  in  mau and  woman.  Matrika  Shakti,  it  observes,  predominates  in the  left  half  of  a  woman's  organism,  which  is  negative  as regards  vital  magnetism.  {3)  Now,  Sushruta  says  that,  in cases  where  female  offspring  is  desired,  the  enceinte    should
(l)     Shdiiia-sth^iiani  Ch.  II.
(2)    f^ifi^n«r*^  ^^»TiT  3«i«iT5«^fT '^i^  sfrff  r\f^i  ^  f^?;T5w^5TrT  nij-  11
Manu  .Samhili  Ch.    I.    J2. (■2.)      ^f^^irtar;  *JI  fi:  ijt^  sfmwnflf^S'T'RT;  1
SfiradS  Tilak  Tanlrani.
INTRODbCTVJN.  XXXIU
snufF  through  her  left  nostril  (thq  expressed  juice  Qf  certain herbals),  while  the  same  should  be  administered  through her  right  nostril  where  njale*  issue  would  be  the  object.  In other  words,  the  anabolic  (Mairika)  or  katabolic  (Piti;}ka) forces  of  a  mother's  organism  can  be  so  adjusted  with  the help  of  drug-dynamics,  as  to  determine, the  sex  of  the  child in  the  womb.  The  b',rth  of  a  male  child  is  usually  pre- saged by  the  appearance  of  the  milk  (which  according  to Sushruta  is  metamorphised  menstraal  blood)  in  the  right breast  of  the  enceinte  ;  and  where  that  has  been  effected with  the  help  of  suitable  medicines,  it  must  be  presumed that  the  Katabolic  pole  of  her  glife-force  has  been  acted upon,  as  desired.
The  original  hermaphroditism,  which  forms  the  anterior condition  of  all  subsequent  sex  distinctions,  and  the  character of  the  two  opposite  poles  of  vital  energy,  have  been  very clearly  set  forth  in  the  Pauranik  allegory  of  Ardha- Narishvara(i).  The  figure,  observes  the  Pauranik  rhapsodist, is  half  male,  half  female  ;  half  life,  half  death  (since,  death, in  fact,  is  the  father  of  Hfe)  (2) ;  half  anabolism,  half katabolism  ;  with  the  crescent  moon,  the  premise,  the s3'mbol  of  progressive  evolution  on  its  brow,  is  made  to  sit on  the  eternal  bull,  the  representative  of  the  inmiutable law  of  the  universe  (lit  : — the  four-footed  order).  The  Rishis and  Rasasiddhas  of  ancient  India  were  fully  aware  of the  fact  that,  conception  is  effected  only  at  an  enormous sacrifice  on  the  part  of  the  mother  ;  that  the  Matrika Shakti  is  the  real  manufacturer  of  life,  and  that  the  Pitrika Shakti  (paternal  element)  evokes,  or  calls  it  into  play  only through  its  disintegrating  or  disruptive  effect  by  separating the  two  opposite  life-poles,  that  lie  neutralised  through contact.  It  is  love  that  governs  these  two  complementary (i)     Vishnu  PurSnam  Ch.  7.  Vs.  lo-ii.  *
(2)    mm:  F?^n  ^^^^^  ^t^  «TTJrfff  ^^v.  1
Mahdbhaialam.
xxxiv  INTRODUCTION.
forces  of  .life  and  death  (i),  (though  in'  fact  they  represent the  two  different  aspects  of  the  same  energy)  and  controls its  evolutionary  rhythms  through  the  desire  of  seeing itself  many  though  one  in  reality.  Does  not  modern  biology endorse  the  same  view  when  it  says  that  the  reproductive cells,  as  protozoons,.are  immortal,  and  that  bodies  are  the natural  appendages  which  blossom.forth  and  fall  off  round these  cells  for  the  fructification  of  their  innate  purposes of  being  (2)?
A  little  more  investigation  into  the  biological  thesis of  the  Rishis  would  be  necessary  for  the  clear  comprehen- sion of  "Shukra-Vahulyani"  and  '"Shonita-Vahulyam"  '  of Sushruta  and  other  Tantras  (3).  iMan  is  both  animal  and spirit  ;  and  the  Ayurvedic  physiology  recognises  two  distinct sets  of  apparatus  in  his  organism  answering  to  the  different phases  of  his  existence.  The  one  helps  him  in  performing the  organic  functions,  which  are  so  essential  to  his  animal existence,  and  keeps  intact  the  co-ordination  of  those  inter- nal functions  with  the  incidents  of  his  environments.  The other  is  attuned  to  the  finer  forces  of  nature,  and    responds
(I)  The  Evolution  of  Sex.  Ch.  XVIII.
Prof.  P.  Gedde/i  and  J,  A.  Thomson. (2)  "The  body  or  soma'\  Weismann  says,  "thus  appears  to  a  certain extent  as  a  subsidiary  appendage  of  the  true  bearers  of  the  life,— the  repro- ductive cells".  Ray  Lankester  has  again  well  expressed  this  :— "Among  the multicellular  animals,  certain  cells  are  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  consti- tuent units  of  the  body,  as  egg-cells  and  sperm-cells  ;  these  conjugate  and continue  to  live,  whilst  the  remaining  cells,  the  mere  carriers  as  it  were  of the  immortal  reproductive  cells,  die  and  disintegrate.  The  bodies  of  the higher  aniivals  which  die,  may  from  this  point  of  view  be  regarded  as something  temporary  and  non-essential,  destined  merely  to  carry  for  a  time, to  nurse,  and  to  nourish  the  mure  important  and  deathless  fission -products of  the  unicellular  egg."— Quoted  in  the  Evelution  of  Sex  (P.  Geddes and  J,  A.  Thompton)  1901.  Chap.  XVIII.
(3)  (a)  ^liTf^^T  wtwrf^  ^f<f^ry^:  HiTi^  1
Sarada  Tilak  Tantram. (15)         Sushrula  SamhilA  (ShSrira  Sthdnam   Ch.  Ill    )
INTRODUCTION.      '  XXXV
to  the  call  of  his  higher  or  psychiq  self.  Tli'e  one  is organic,  the  other  is  psyC^ic  The  one  chains  him  down to  the  phenomenal,  and  is"  governed  by  the  laws  of  growth and  decay  ;  the  other  opens  on  the  region  of  absolute realities  where  growth  and  decay  have  no  room  to  be. Growth  is  not  the  only  condition  of  life.  Man  may  exist without  food  (i)or  respiration,  only  if  he  can  manage  to  dive deep  into  the  realities  within  himself.  Between  these  two  sets of  apparatus  there  is  the  Jivatma,  which,  by  its  own  peculiar energy  (the  will-force),  can  operate  in  phenomenal  or  organic pl?,in,  or  recede  from  thence  into  the  psychic  one,  thus being  in  contact  with  the  world  of  the  senses'  and  the  one that  is  beyond  the  darkness  of  death.  Death,  in  fact,  is the  grand  usherer  to  life,  which  is  only  the  rise  of  the curtain  over  the  life's  drama,  all  equipments  for  which  are made  in  the  green  room  of  death.
A  man  can  not  propagate  at  will.  No  amount  of  willing on  the  part  of  the  parent-animal  can  help  him  in  creating progeny.  The  self  of  the  child,  who  is  about  to  come  into life,  chooses  its  own  parents,  according  to  the  dynamics  of its  own  acts  or  Karma,  from  the  region  of  the  lunar  Pitris or  quiescent  life,  if  it  be  warrantable  to  use  such  an  expres- sion (2).  The  self  of  the  would-be  child  mixes  with  the  self of  its  human  father,  and  hovers  over  the  reproductive  cells of  the  latter's  organism,  and  regulates  the  intensity  of  its father's  sexual  desire,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  sex, determined  necessary  for  the  fruition  of  the  purposes  of its  advent  into  the  world.  A  greater  intensity  of  its father's  desires  ensures  the  preponderance  of  tile  Pitrika Shakti   (katabolism)    in     the     impregnated     ovum,     which
Skanda    PurSnam   quoted   by   Shridhara   SvSmi   in   his   commentaries on  the  Vishnu  Purdnam.     Ch.  VI.  V.  i6.  ,
(2)  ^^^m  ^7m\^m  1
Shruti.
XXXVl  '  INTRODUCTION.
determiiies  the  male^sex  of  the  child,  while  such  a  thing, on  the  part  of  the  mother  at  the  time,  is  followed  by  the relative  preponderance  of  the  Afatrika  Shakti  (anabolism) which  accounts  for  the  femininity  of  the  issue.  Equal  in- tensity of  sexual  desires  in  both  the  parents,  creating  an absence  of  the  relative  preponderance  of  the  Pitrika  and Matrika  Shaktis  in  the  impregnated  ovum,  leaves  the  sex of  the  child  practically  undetermined.  The  relative  prepon- derance of  the  Pitrikd  or  Matrika  Shakti,  as  evidenced  by the  greater  or  less  intensity  of  the  sexual  desire  of  either of  the  parents,  which  results  in  the  speedier  emission  of  the paternal  or  maternal  element  (sperm  or  ovum)  during  an  act of  successful  fecundation,  is  contemplated  by  the  term ''Shukra-Vahulyam,"  or  "Shonita-Vahulyam,"  by  the  framer of  the  Samhita,  as  ma}-  be  fully  substantiated  by  a  couplet by  the  venerable  Daruvahi  (i).
So  far  Sushruta  is  at  one  with  the  modern  Western theory  of  preponderant  katabolism  or  anabolism  in  the ovum  as  the  determining  factor  of  the  sexual  diamorphism to  the  extent  that  seeds  or  reproductive  cells  are  the  bearers and  not  the  manufacturers  of  life,  only  containing  those categories  which  foster  life,  and  help  its  evolution  into  an organic  being.  To  deny  this  would  be  to  admit  the  chemi- cal, or  physiological  basis  of  life,  which,  as  a  theory,  was never  acceptable  to  the  biologists  of  ancient  India. The  number  of  reproductive  cells  may  be  increased  bv suitable  dietary,  and  to  say  that  the  immortal  reproductive cells,  as  the  creators  of  life,  come  out  of  the  mortal,  organic food  stufll*  is  to  say  that  darkness  is  the  father  of  light.  The question    of  the  immortality   of   the  seed  (germ  plasm)  has
(I)    ^a«g^:  q^q^ft  qgr?^  Uw^r[  ^^T^_^  \
fl^^qif^flT  ^'qi'Sn?!^  l^fl^cTT  II D5rub5hi  (Quoted  by  Arunadatla  in  his  commentaries  on  Viigbhat).
INTRODUCTION.  XXXVii
been  elaborately  discussed  in  the  Gommentaries  on  the Sankhya  Darshanam(i).  The, Pjah  Vindus (germ  cells)  pulsate with  the  vibrations  (rhythmic  movements),  which  are^the relics  of  the  primordial  ethereal  vibrations,  which  ,ushered in  the  birth-throes  of  the  universe.  ^  As  such,  they  are essential  to  the  evolution  of  life  ;  and  man,  as  an  offspring of  the  universe,  still  retains  them  in  his  reproductive  cells as  the  best  condition  for  calling  out  the  life  in  his  offspring, when  its  seK  enters  into  the  impregnated  ovum  in  the mother's  womb.  Life  is  the  essence  of  self,  and  not  the prjoduct  of  any  chemical  or  physiological  process.  It  is  an influx  ;  and  microscopes  and  spectroscopes  mav  not expose  to  view  the  hinterlands  of  birth  and  genesis. Perhaps  it  was  this  theorv  of  will-force  and  intensity  of parental  desire  as  determining  the  sex  in  the  child,  together with  the  facts  of  parthenogenesis  observed  in  lower  animals, from  which  Sushruta  was  disposed  to  extend  the  analogy to  the  human  species,  and  believed  that  conception  without sexual  union  is  possible  in  women.
^j.  The  conception  of  the  nature  of  these  Matrika  and J '.rika  Shaktis  is  more  clearly  set  forth  in  the  Pauranika n  jth  regarding  the  origin  (etiology)  of  fever  ;  Sushruta relates  the  story  as  follows  : — Daksha,  the  father  of  the universal  mother,  (or  constructive  metabolism  in  man) insulted  the  divine  father,  her  consort  (destructive  meta- bolism), by  witholding  his  quota  of  sacrificial  oblations. The  wrath  of  the  insulted  deity  broke  out  in  the  shape  of a  morbific  heat  (hyperpyrexia)  which  is  fever.  The  process of   digestion    in    man    has  been    often    compared  'to  an  act
(l)  (a)  qRHTSTtftS'C^I^T  ^"Wl,^^  I
Sankhya  Sutra  Ch.  I.    122.
(b)  fT^5TT<T  ^^fh  '
Ibid.  Ch.  III.  3.
(c)    *r%  f%  ^^^^^m^^mfn^]^'^^wf^^Tff    x?m^i   ^^i*
Sankhya  Prabachana  Vashya  (Vijn^n  Bhikshu)  Ch.  I.  S.  I.
XXXVni  INTRODUCTION.
<  f
•  <
of  Homa  sacrifice  (i)  in  the  Ayurveda.  Stripped  of  its allegory  the  myth  may  be  exp^iined  quite  in  a  pathological lin^  It  means  that  when  the  t*itrika  Shakti,  the  process of  destructive  metabolism  (Pita,  father  or  Shiva  in  Hindu mythology  being  the  god  of  destruction  or  disintegration)  of the  body  is  not  properly  served  by  the  factors,  which noun'sh  its  constructive  metabolism  (Father  of  the  Matrika Shakti),  the  excrements  and  excretory  process  of  the  body are  arrested  (b^r  the  wrathful  deity),  and  the  heat  generated in  consequence  is  fever.  Fever,  then,  is  a  disease  of  defective digestion  and  excretion.  Whenever  this  Pit rika  Shakti,.  is disturbed  or  not  properly  served  there  is  fever,  and  heat is  one  of  its  essential  effects.
With  a  precision  and  love  of  details,  which  mark  the best  days  of  Brahmanic  literature,  Sushruta  lays  down  rules of  diet  and  conduct  to  be  observed  by  the  enceinte,  from month  to  month,  during  the  whole  period  of  gestation, and  gives  medicinal  recipes  for  the  development  of  a partiall}^  atrophied  child  in  the  womb.
A  perusal  of  the  Chapter  on  Marma  Shiriram  world leave  no  doubt  for  the  conclusion  that  anatomical  kt\psP/, ledge  was  cultivated  by  surgeons  and  soldiers  alike,  la  jr.. knowledge  about  the  locations  of  the  vulnerable  joints,  iir nerves,  or  vein  anastomoses  where  a  blow  or  a  little pressure  may  enable  him  to  make  short  work  of  his  man could  not  but  be  dearly  prized  by  the  soldiery  at  a time  when  the  fate  of  a  war  was  often  decided  by the  success  of  a  single  champion,  and  we  have  reasons to  belieVe  that  a  scientific  system  of  wrestling  was formulated  in  the  light  of  the  Sushruta  Samhita,  and practised     by   the     gentry   of    ancient     India     much    like
c
( I)    ^ffcTTTT  «?r  q'5fi'q=?T^^flfcT  ^:  I
Charaka  SamhitS.
INTRODUCTION.  XXXIX
•  >
the  Jiujitsu  (Skr.  Yuyutsu,  t,he  intending  fighter)  of modern  Japan,  (i).  '
Sushnita's  Physiolo^ ."— But  if  Sushruta  is  ad- mired so  much  for  his  practical  and  scientific  jt!ast of  mind,  it  is  his  writings  on  Physiologv,  ''which  is practicalh-  the  same  as  the  one  adopted  by  all  schools  of the  Ayurveda)  which  ,  have  appeared  as  a  stumbling block  to  the  intelligence  of  many  a  Western  and and  Eastern  scholar.  European  Sanskritists  have  thought fit  to  translate  "Vayu,"  "Pittam''  and  "Kapham"  (the  three main  physiological  functions)  as  air,  bile  and  phlegm. B\l\  nothing  could  be  more  misleading,  or  erroneous  than that.  A  right  understanding  of  the  science  of  the  Ayur- vedic medicine,  in  all  its  branches,  hinges  on  a  right  concep- tion of  the  Vayu.  Pittam  and  Kapham,  so  we  should  like to  clear  up  the  nature  of  these  three  physiological  factors before  proceeding  farther  in  our  enquiry.
Antiquity     of    the    division:— A    reference   to    these
three  physiological  factors  of  Vayu,   Pittam    and    Kapham,
under   the   name    of   Tridhatu.     is   first   met    with    in    the
Rikveda,  (3).     Sayana  explains  the  term  as   a    synonvm    for
Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham.    The  Vedic  physicians  possessed
at  least  a  considerable  knowledge    of   the  process   of  diges-
tionf4),  the  circulation  of  gas  in  the  human  organism,  and  of
(i)  It  is  anions  that  the  phonetic  and  etymological  resemblance between  Sanskrit  "Juyutsu"  and  Japanese  ''Jiujitsu"  (would  be  fighter) should  be  so  close.  Perhaps  it  was  the  Buddhist  missionaries  (and  they were  not  always  peaceful  hermits)  who  had  carried  with  them  a  system of  scientific  wrestling  from  India,  which  was  subsequently  developed  in Japan.  Compare  with  the  complete  Kano,  Jiu-jitsu  (Jeudo)  by  H.  Irving Hancock  and  Katsukuma  Higashi.  Chart  I  and  III.
(3)    *  *  *  f^^rg  vm  w^ct'  :crw^^  11
Rik.  Samhita.  I.  3,  6. Sayana  explains  it  as
(4)  ^rm:  if!?n^^T  f^^  1  tmrr  w.  wf^^v^r^'^j^  w^Ict. 5|1»ni5^  'fiWtf^fT,  ^sfT^:   ^:   unu:  1    ^^sc.  ^^  !   w^^'.-^m  ^sf^Ti
Chhandagya  Brihmana.
Xl  ^      INTCiODUCTlON.
the  properties  and  functioiv>  of  flesh,  fat,  muscles,  tendons, ligaments  and  cartilages.  But  to  the  Acharyas  of  the Ayurveda  belongs  the  glor\'  of  "nrs^.  formulating  a  systematic physiological  science,  to  which  end  Sushruta  as  a  surgeon did  con<;ribute  no  mean  a  quo'.a.  In  the  light  of  Western science  the  actionsr  of  living  matter,  varied  as  they  are, may  be  reduced  to  three  categorief,  viz.  (a)  Sustentative, {d)  Generative,  and  (c)  Correlative  functions.  The  second is  not  co-extensive  with  the  entire  existence  of  a  living organism,  Sushruta  observes  some  such  distinction  among the  functions  of  a  living  organism  when  he  denominates the  living  body  as  the  "three  supported  one"  (Tristhunam), and  describes  the  normal  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham  as its  three  supports.  We  wonder  how  the  term  Vayu, meaning  nerve  force,  can  be  confounded  with  the  same term  meaning  air,  since  Sushruta  derives  the  former from  the  root  "Va,"  to  move,  to  spread.  Vayu,  according to  Sushruta,  is  so  called  from  the  fact  of  its  sensory  and motor  functions  such  as,  smelling,  &c.  But  the  Vayu  in the  Ayurveda  is  not  wholly  a  physical  or  organic  force,  it has  its  spiritual  aspect  as  well  which  does  not  legitimately fall  within  the  scope  of  our  enquiry.  It  is  safe  to  aver however,  that  the  Ayurvedic  physiology,  like  its sister  science  in  modern  Europe,  is  concerned  more with  the  invisible  molecular  components  of  the  human organism,  than  with  the  workings  of  its  gross  members. The  holy  Agnivesha  warns  the  students  of  physiology against  the  danger  of  regarding  the  human  system  as  some- thing other  than  the  aggregate  of  molecules  (i).
*  Charaka  Saniliit^  ShArirasthAnam,  Chap.  VII.
INTRODUCTI9N.  xli
The  three  fundamental  principles  of  Vayu,,Pittam and    Kaphah:  — The  actions   of   living    matter    vary    and so     may    be    reduced     to^    three     categories.     They     are either— (i),  functions  which  affect  the  material  conipositJDn of  the  body  and  determine  its  mass,  which  is  the  baUnce  of the  processes  of  waste  on  one  hand  and  t^hose  of  assimilation on  the  other.  Or  (2),  they  are   functions  which  subserve  the process    of   reproduction    which    is  essentially  the   detach- ment of  a    part    endowed    with    the    powers    of  developing into   an    independent    whole,    or  (3),    they    are  functions  in virtues  of  which    one    part    of  the    body  is  able  to   exert  a direct  influence   on   another,    and^  the    body,  by  its  parts  as a    whole,    becomes  a    source    of   molar    motion.     The    first may  be  termed  Sustentative,  the  second  Generative,   and the  third  Correlative  functions.    The  above  is  the  sum  and substance  of  the  works  which  a  living  matter  has  to  perform. But    setting    apart   the     processes    of    reproduction    as     a subject     for     future     discussion,     we     shall     now     try    to examine  what  the  other  two   functions   are   as    understood by    Oriental    thinkers.     In    the    Mahfibhiratam  the  Prdna vayu    is  described  as  a  force,  akin  to  electricity.     It  is  some- what like  a  flash  of   lightning  (1).     This    fact  aHonce  shows the  errors  of  confounding  Prana  vdyzi  with  an  effete  material —  with  gases  generated  during   the    processes   of   digestion. Shushruta    describes    it  as  a  force,  (2)  which  sets   the  whole organism  into   motion.    Self-evolved,  it  acts  as  the  principal
(i)      HTOSIT^^^  JJcTRt  Mm  ?sifvf^?j^  I
MahSbMratam.  ShAnti  Pa^va  S.  39.
(2)  Fo'ce  may  be  defined  as  ihat  which  tends  to  produce  motion  in a  body  at  lesi,  or  to  produce  change  of  motion  in  a  body  which  is  movjng. — Daschanel,
6
xlii  INJRODUCTION.
factor  that  deLerinines  the  genesis,  continuance  and  disin- tegration of  the  livir-g  body.  It  is  the  primary  cause — an all-in-all  that  governs  our  organic  as  well  as  our  cognitive faQulties.  Its  special  feature  is  that  the  vibration,  that  is produqed  in  it,  instead  of  travelling  like  light  in  a  transverse direction,  takes  a  course  as  the  controller  of  the  correlative functions  of  the  system.  It  maintains  an  equilibrium  between the  Pittam  and  Shleshma  which  are  said  to  be  inert,  (i)  But for  this  adjustment  the  living  body  would  stand  in  imminent danger  of  being  consumed  like  fuel  by  its  internal  heat or  fire.  Taking  into  consideration  the  various  functions  the living  body  has  to  perform,  Sushruta  attempts  a   classif.ca-
tion  of  Vdyu  into  Prana,  Udana,  Samana,  Vyana  and
Apana,  which,  in  detail,  correspond  to  the  divisions  of functions  performed  by  the  Cerebro-spinal  and  Sympathe- tic nerves  of  the  Western  physiology.  Tintric  literature abounds  in  the  descriptions  of  the  Nadichakras  (nerve plexuses)  and  contains  a  more  detailed  account  of  the  motor, sensory,  and  mixed  nerves  according  to  their  differences  in their  functions  and  relations.  In  short,  the  term  Vayu  may not  only  be  rightly  interpreted  to  mean  the  nerve  force,  but is  often  extended  to  include  any  kind  of  electro-motor  or molecular  force  (as  when  we  speak  of  the  V^yu  of  the  soil), though  the  term  is  loosely  applied  now  to  signify  gas  or air.  The  Rishis  of  yore  gave  the  name  of  V;iyu  to  the bodily  force  in  the  absence  of  any  suitable  nomenclature, little  suspecting  that  it  might  be  confounded  with  the atmospheric  air  by  the  foreign  translators  of  their  works.
Charaka,  Sutraslh4nam.  Chap.  XII.
Inert  i.s  Pittam,  inert  is  Kaphah,  inert   are   the  Malas   &    'Jh^lus    Like clouds,  they  go  wherever  they  arc!-  carried  by  the  V5yu,
INTRODUCTION.  xliii
Pittam  : — The  function  of  the  »Pittam  consists  in metamorphosing  the  chyle,  .through  a  graduated  series of  organic  principles,  to  a  protoplasmic  substance  like sperm  in  men,  and  the  ovum  in  women.  Thus  we  see  that the  Pittam  of  the  Ayurveda  corresponds  to  metabolism of  Western  physiology.  But  b}?  a  confounding  carelessness of  terms  the  excreted  portion  of  Rasa  and  blood  though ultimately  connected  with  those  normal  physiological processes  has  been  respectively  styled  as  the  Doshas  or defiling  principles  of  Kaphah  and  Pittam.  Again,  as  in  the case,  of  soil,  the  terms  V^yu,  Pittam  and  Kaphah  are  extend- ed to  denote  magnetism,  kinetic  energy  and  humidity  of  its molecules.  The  circulation  of  blood  is  connected  with  the Pittam,  while  the  circulation  of  lymph  chyle  fRasa)  is related  to  Shleshmi  the  two  combinedly  forming  what is  called  the  sustentative  function  of  the  Western Physiology.
The  term  Pittam,  which,  by  its  etymology,  signifies the  agent  of  metabolism,  has  been  loosely  used  by  our Ayurvedic  physiolgists  to  denote  two  different  organic principles  from  an  observed  similarity  in  their  nature  and functions.  Pittam  in  Sanskrit  means  both  bile  and  meta- bolism of  tissues  as  well  as  the  bodily  heat  which  is  the product  of  the  latter.
Hence  a  few  commentators  lean  towards  the  view that  Pittam  is  the  heat  incarcerated  in  the  bile,  and the  principal  agent  in  performing  digestion  (i).  The real  import  of  the  term  may  be  gathered  from  the five  sub-divisions  of  the  Pittam,  made  by  our  '  Rishis according    to    their    functions  and   locations,  and  which  are
called  the  Pachaka,  Ranjaka,  Sadhaka,  A'lochaka  and
(l)     5^^:  ^g^Rim^^lfq  fqfl^  ^^WT^Sf'af?;f?I '*
Madhukosha.
Xliv  '         INTRODUCTION.
Bhr^jaka.  All  metabolic  processes  in  the  organism, whether  constructive  or  dj^structive,  are  called  Pittam, wljich  is  said  to  be  in  the  products  of  those  processes whether  serum,  bile,  blood,  albumen,  etc.,  which  are  either essential  to  the  substance  of  the  body,  or  to  the  proper performance  of  any  organic  function.  Hence  we  learn  that Pittam  is  latent  in  Lasika  (Serum),  blood,  lymph  chyle, albumen  etc.,  and  in  the  organs  of  touch  and  sight.  In other  words,  metabolism  goes  on  in  those  principles  and regions  of  the  human  organism  (i)  either  as  a  sustentative or  as  a  cognetic  physiological  process.  First,  we  have  ,,the Pachakagni  or  the  heat  of  digestion,  which  is  situated  in the  region  between  the  stomach  and  the  intestines  ;  (2)  and being  a  liquid  fire  or  fluid  heat  incarcerated  in  the  secre- tions of  the  liver  (bile),  it  is  primarily  concerned  in  digesting the  four  kinds  of  food  (as  they  meet  it  in  the  abdomen). Thus  we  see  that  the  Pachakagni  of  our  Ayurveda  is  the same  as  the  bile  of  Western  physiology,  its  other  function being  to  differentiate  (precipitate)  the  nutritive  essence  of the  food  from  its  unutilisable  portion,  and  to  act  as  an excrementitious  matter.  It  is  this  Pittam,  which  makes metabolism  in  other  parts  of  the  bodv  possible,  (3)  b)' helping  the  organism  in  acquiring  fresh  energy.
(1)    iTfv(?:i9f?j:  ^^ft^^t^T^'PfT'  Tw.  I
l^rsjafil"  ^  fqtrw  TlfHT^  f^^r\  II
Bdgbhat  (Sutra  Sihinam  ch.  XII.) (2)  The  bile  assists  in  emulsifying  the  fats  of  the  foods,  and  thus rendering  them  capable  of  passing  into  the  lacteals  by  absorption  *.  The bile  has  b*een  considered  as  a  natural  purgative  *  *  *  The  bile  appears to  have  the  power  of  precipitating  the  gastric  proteoses  and  peptones, together  with  the  pepsin,  which  is  mixed  up  with  them.  *  *  *  As  an excrementitious  substance,  the  bile  may  serve  as  a  medicine  for  the  separa- tion of  certain  highly  carbonaceous  substances  from  the  blood.
Kirk's  Physiology  Ch.  XIII.  pp    377-378.
^   (3)    tT«f^iR^fqrTrr^t  ^EfjiiTfitgg^T^'T  1
^i'lfh  ^sT?T%ii  ^\'^'^  siTfl  rTfTnr.fTfl;  11
Bagbhat  Sutra  ch.  XII.
INTRODUCTION.      '  xlv
»
The  second  kind  of  Pittam  i^'called  RanjakaoV  pigment Pittam  from  the  circumstance  of  its  imparting  the characteristic  colour  to  th'e  lymph  chyle  as  it  is  transformed into  blood  by  coursing  through  the  liver  and  spleen,  u^here it  is  located  (i).
The  third  kind  r.f  Pittair.  (Sadhak'a)  is  situated  in  the heart,  and  indirectly  a5s*\sts  in  the  performance  of  cognitive functions  in  man  by  keeping  up  the  rhythmic  cardiac contractions  (2).  Perhaps  it  is  this  view  of  the  heart's contraction  that  predisposed  many  of    our    ancient    physio-
*  (l)  A.  The  colouring  matter  of  the  Ijilc  is  derived  from  and  is  closely related  to  that  of  blood,  since  the  qualities  of  the  bile  pigment  secreted are  markedly  increased  by  the  injection  of  substances  into  the  veins  which are  capable  of  setting  free  haemoglobin
Kirk's  Physiology — (Metabolism  in  the  liver.)  Ch.  XII.  p.  505.
B.  There  seems  to  be  a  close  relationship  between  the  colouring matters  of  the  blood  and  of  the  bile,  and  '  '  between  these  and  that  of urine  (urobilin)  and  of  the  feces— Ibid    Ch.  \  III.  p.  376.
c.  It  seems  probable  that  the  spleen,  like  the  lymphatic  glands,  is engaged  in  the  formation  of  blood  corpuscles.  For  it  is  quite  certain, tl  at  the  blood  of  the  splenic  vein  contains  an  unusually  large  number  of white  corpuscles,  t  t  i"  In  Kottikor's  opinion,  the  development  of  colour- less and  .also  coloured  corpuscles  of  the  l)lood,  is  one  of  the  essential functions  of  the  spleen,  into  the  veins  of  which  the  new  formed  corpuscles pass,  and  are  conveved  into  the  general  current  of  the  circulations.
Ibid.     Ch.  XII.
(2)  A.  The  contraction  (of  the  heart)  can  not  be  long  maintained without  a  due  supply  of  blood  or  of  a  similar  nutritive  fluid.  *  *  *  The view  that  is  at  present  taken  of  the  action  of  the  heart  is  *  *  that  in  heart muscle,  as  in  protoplasm  generally,  the  metabolic  processes  are  those  of anabolism  or  building  up.  which  takes  place  during  diastole  of  the  heart *  *  *  and  the  katabolism  or  discharge  which  is  manifested  in  the  contrac- tion of  the  heart.     Kirk's  Physiology  (metabolism  of  the  heart).  Ch.  VI.
*1T^  f  ??t"  ffTffl  II  ,  •»
BSgbhat  Sutra.     Ch.  XII.  13.
xlvi  '    INTRODUCTION.
logists  to  hold  it  ^  as  iWe  seat  of  cognition  ( Viiddhi Sthanam).  (l)
The-  fourth,  which  is  the  Albchaka  or  the  Pittam  of sight;  indicates  the  metabolic  process  in  the  substance  of the  retina  (Drishti)  which  gives    rise    to  visual  sensation.  (2;
The  fifth  is  the  Bhrajakagni  or  the  Pittam  in  the  skin which  produces  perspiration  or  hefps  exudations  from  the skin  by  evaporation.  In  short  it  is  the  Pittam  which  keeps active,  under  certain  circumstances,  the  secretions  from  the sweat  and  sebaceous  glands  of  the  human  skin.
Kaphah  :— Sushruta  is  oie  in  holding  with  Foster  thgj "the  animal  body  dies  daily,  in  the  sense  that  at  every moment  some  part  of  its  substance  is  suffering  decay, is  undergoing  combustion."'  The  etymological  significance of  the  term  Shariam  vSkr.  Shri,  to  wither  up)  testifies  to his  knowledge  of  the  combustion  that  goes  on  within  the human  system.  Three  kinds  of  fire  are  detected  in  the  bod}', which  are  sure  to  feed  upon  its  constituent  principles  in the  absence  of  proper  fuel  in  the  shape  of  food  and  air. It  is  food  and  the  fundamental  brdily  principle  of  Shleshma, which  is  cooling  or  watery  in  its  essence,  that  fly  to  the rescue  of  the  organism,  the  latter  (Sleshma)  surcharging  ii with  its  own  essential  humidity  and  keeping  intact  the integration  of  its  component  molecules.
The  Rasa,  or  lymph  chyle  which  is  formed  out  of  the ingested    food,     prevents    the     internal     bodily     fire-     from
(i)  The  seat  of  the  moon  is  at  the  root  of  the  palate  ami  thai  of  the sun  is  at  the  root  of  the  navel ;  the  place  of  the  air  (or  breath)  is  above the  sun,  and  mind  dwells  above  the  moon,  Chittam  (or  the  passage between  the  mind  and  the  spiritual  soul)  dwells  above  the  sun.  and  life dwells  above  the  moon.
Jn4na  Sankallni  Tantrani,   International  Journal  of Tdntrik  order  (New  York)  Vol.  V'.  No.  5  p.  109.
(2)  It  is  supposed  that  the  change  effected  by  the  light,  which  falls upon  the  retina,  is  in  fact  a  chemical  alteration  in  the  protoplasm,  and  that this  stimulates  the  optic  nerve-endings.     Kirk's  Physiology  Ch,  XVII,
INTRODUCT.PN.  xlvii
preying  upon  the  vitals  by  coursing  freely  th;'Ough  the whole  organism.  The  Rasa,  thus  g^enerated,  undergoes a  sort  of  purification,  the  » purified  portion  being  called Prasddabhuta,  and  the  excreted  portion  Malabhttta,  suc^>9  as are  found  as  effete  products  deposited  in  certain  pores  of the  body.  Kaphah  or  Sleshmd  is  that  pprtion  of  Rasa  which fills  all  the  intercellular^  spaces  of  the  body,  thus  holding them  together  in  a  kind  of  cooling  embrace  (Skr.  Slish  to embrace)  and  prevents  (il  the  dreadful  combustion  which would  otherwise  have  been  caused  by  organic  heat. Our  Acharjas  have  classified  the  Kaphah  into  five  diflFerent kinds  such  as  the  Kledaka,  Avalanwaka,  Vodhaka  and Shlcsmaka  according  to  their  different  functions  and locations  in  the  economy.
Dosha  : — The  lymph  chyle,  born  of  the  digested  food, and  which  courses  through  the  body,  potentially  contains the  elements  which  build  the  diflferent  tissues  of  the human  organism.  Under  the  influence  of  metabolic  heat it  is  progressively  transformed  into  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bone, marrow,  semen  and  OJah.  In  other  words,  under  the process  of  physiological  metamorphosis,  the  lymph  chyle sets  free  that  part  of  its  constituents  (2)  which  possess  blood-
(i)     A     ^wftl*lK*!: — Bagbhat.
Charaka  Chikitshasth,<.nam.   Chap.  15. (2)    A.    %^Ttg  ?}^Tli^T:  TJ^f^rf  f^f^«(*ft;  I
fi^^^n:  ^Tg^^  ^f^T*i  ^t^^  K^:  II
Bh^va  Mishra.
Chakra  Datta's  commentary  on  the  Charaka  Samhit^.  SutrasthSrjani. Cr.    XXVIIl.
xlviii  int;roduction.
making  properties,  and  are  ultimately  transformed  into blood — (its  unuiilised^or  excreted  portion  being  eliminated through  the  natural  apertures  of  the  body),  and  so  on, thrqugh  the  progressive  series  of  metabolism  to  Oj'a/i Dhd.iu.>  Thus  with  ihc  derangement  f)f  the  bodily  Vayu which  causes  the  fr^e  coursing  oi  the  lymph  ch3'le  through its  vessels,  the  Pittam  imetabolismj,of  tissues),  in  any  parti- cular part  of  the  body,  is  also  affected  by  reason  of  its incarceration,  and  thus  causes  an  increase  or  diminu- tion in  the  excreted  portion  of  the  Rasa,  which  is  another name  for  Kapham  during  the  progressive  metabolism.  Thus we  see  that  Vayu,  Pitta^i,  and  Kaphah,  which,  in  their normal  state,  are  the  three  supporting  principles  of  the  body are  transformed  into  morbific  diathesis  by  increasing  or diminishing  the  bodily  heat,  secretions,  or  excretions. t
Thus  congestion  and  inanition  (atony)  are  the  two main  forms  of  disease  recognised  by  the  Ayurvedic  Patholo- gists, the  former  being  held  amenable  to  resolution  or elimination,  and  the  latter  to  local  feeding  or  nourishment.
Agni  and  Dh^tvagnis  : — We  can  not  better  conclude this  portion  of  our  dissertation  than  by  speaking  a  word  or two  about  Agni.  Sushruta  raises  the  question  whether  there is  any  kind  of  fire  in  the  human  organism  other  than  the Pittam  ;  or  are  they  identical  ?  Sushruta  holds  that  the  Pittam is  the  only  fire  present  in  the  system,  in  as  much  as  all  acts from  the  digestion  of  food  to  the  disintegration  of  tissues  are performed  with  the  help  of  the  Pittam,  which  includes within  its  signification  what  is  connoted  by  Anabolism  and Katabolism  of  Western  Physiologists.  But  Agnivesha  and certain  sections  of  the  Ayurvedic  Acharyayas  hold  that  there
^fTf^=5WWri^  «?^  ftqi  5f?T  «I,?TI:  II
Bh^vaprakeisha  Part  I.
Charaka  Sutrasthinam  Chap.  I.
/'
,/ /
rxTRODrcTfoN.     ,  xlix
are  five  Anjali-fuls  of  Agni  (i)'  in  the  human  t)rganism. This  discrepancy  is  best  explained  away  by  including  one Yava  measure  of  Agni  -  (enzymes,  ferment)  in  the  five Anjali-measures  of  Pittam.  •'
The  A'yurvedic  Physiology  recognises  the  exist'ence  of another  kind  of  Agni,  which  is  called  Dhatvagni  (proto- plasm) and  which  it  cL\ssifies  into  seven  different  kinds, Arunadatta,  the  celebrated  commentator  of  the  Ashtanga- hridayam,  holds  that  there  are  as  many  Dhatvagnis  as  the constituents  of  the  body.  (2)
'(i)  q'g  fiiTT^— Charaka  Samhita. (2)  A    q^  qT^vftffi^i '5Bra?f:— v^  ^^^ift?:.    ^'^tt^^^I  ^rg<fl[inr
flfq  qigi?rfcT^(9rn  fT(?Tfq  qTf?f^T3I^r«Io|:  1  ^g  qif^^Till'flirw  3»r: qi^:  I     Arundatta.
q^g  ?Tt€q3?^  5I?Tq  -^  q'^rfusrcrr^ffT  II      Ibid.
r.    ^  T^TTf  ■^^^^\  ^ig^TTit  'g^=^%  1
fqrnWl!;  ^  \W^  '^m  T^R^^^f^^ffT  II fm'^'e^  HM  *Tf«  ^TfT  ^"^^1  q^^^fl?T  II
l^a  T?^f|c5J^  5fT?r^Sf^  f^^t?^T*T  I ^frf?T  fT^  ^Tf^^T^j  TW  ^kli:  II
ii^ffTOifir  1^55^  #^  f\-n\  riff:  w,?t:  i cHJiTri  f{'^m,  f\\  #f  5[r^'  fr5iTg?T  fT?f:  11
^iaT^T9?lf^fvwiq  :  9^fq^'  ^qHsf^g  I
Charaka  SamhiiS,  ChikitsSsthSnam^  Chapter  X\'.
I).      ^f«f¥  mJTTft  >^?Tfr  f^f^^  ^:  I
q^T»^*Tf^f«:  qi^  gif'Tf  ff  ?  q^l^rf:  I!  "
Vid  lljid  Chap.   XX.
1  intr6duction.
The  tommeniator  of  the  Chhandagya  Bhasyani  has emphasised  the  identity  of  the  Pittani  and  the  solar  heat. In  fact  it  was  a  doctrine  of  faith  among  the  Rishis  that the  solar  heat  pent  up  in  the  solids  is  transformed  into organic  heat  (Bhutagni)  which,  becoming  liberated  in  the stomach,  produces  the  heat  of  digestion,  (i)  All  these are  but  different  forms  of  solar  "^  heat.  The  Dhatvagni and  Udaragni  lie  inert  in  the  organism.  It  is  the  Vayu that  sets  them  free  and  makes  them  operative.
The  Dhatvagnis  (protoplasm)  of  the    muscle    are    not  of
the  same  kind  as  that    of  the   arteries.     We  cannot    resist'
<■
the    temptation    of     quoting   a     few    lines      from    Foster's physiology  on  the  subject.*
(I)  A.     flra:  ^«<  ^^\  M^m-^^  ^%^^\  «  ^f ^*  ^q?")^r?T  ^.^
ChhAndogya  Upanisliad.
Chh^ndogya  Bh^syam.
"  These  facts  and  other  considenitions,  which  might  be  brought forward,  lead  to  tl\e  tentative  conception  of  protoplasm  as  being  a substance  (if  we  may  use  the  word  in  somewhat  loose  sense)  not  only unstable  in  nature  but  subject  to  incessant  change,  existing  indeed  as the  expression  of  incessant  molecular,  i.  i.  chemical  and  physical cliange,  ver3'  much  as  a  fountain  is  the  expression  of  incessant replacement  of  water.  We  may  picture  to  ourselves  the  total <:'hange.  which  we  denote  by  the  term  "metabolism,"  as  consisting on  the  one  hand,  of  a  downward  series  of  i,Katabolic  changes)  a  stair of  many  steps  in  which  the  more  complex  bodies  are  broken  down with  the  setting  free  of  energy  into  simpler  waste  bodies,  and, on  the  other  hand,  of  an  upward  series  of  changes  (anabolic  changes) also  a  stair  of  _  many  steps,  by  which  ihe  dead  food  of  varying simplicity  or  complexity  is  with  further  assumption  of  energ}- built  up  into  more  and  more  complex  bodies.  The  summit  of  the do'uble  stair  we  call  ''protoplosm"  whether  we  have  right  to  speak of  it  as  a  single  hodv  .'in  the   chemical    sense    of  that    word    or   as  a
INTRODUCTION.     ,  ll
From  whal  has  now  been  sUted  regarding  ihe  func- tions and  significations  of  the  Vayu,  l*ittam  and  Kaphah, it  will  appear  that  the  Achai*yayas  of  the  Ayurveda  contem- plated three  different  sets  of  principles  in  the  domains  of Biology  and  Pathology.     Vayu,    Pittam,    and    Kaphah    are
mixture  in  some  way  of  several  bodies.  Whether  we  should  regard it  as  tlie  very  summit  of  the  double  stair,  or  as  embracing  as  well as  the  topmost  steps  in  either  side,  we  can  not  at  present  tell. Even  if  this  be  a  simple  substance  forming  the  topmost  summit, its  existence  is  absolutely  temporary,  at  one  instance  it  is  made,  at the  next  it  is  unmade  matter,  which  is  passing  through  the  phase of  life,  rolls  up  the  ascending  step  t«5  the  top  and  forthwith  rolls down  on  the  other  side  *       o      o
Further  the  dead  food  itself  fairly,  but  far  from  being  wholly stable  in  character,  becomes  more  and  more  complex  living  material. It  becomes  more  and  more  explosive  and  when  it  reaches  the  sum- mit its  equilibrium  is  over-thrown  and  it  actually  explodes.  The  whole downward  stair  of  events  seems  in  fact  to  be  a  series  of  explosives by  means  of  which  the  energy  latent  in  the  dead  food  and  augmented by  the  touches  through  which  the  dead  food  becomes  living protoplasm,  is  set  free.  Some  of  those  freed  energy  is  used  up again  by  the  material  itself,  in  order  to  carry  on  tliis  same  vivification of  dead  food,  the  rest  leaves  the  body  as  heat  or  motion.
If  this  be  admitted  it  almost  inevitably  follows,  that  what  we have  called  protoplasm,  can  not  be  alwnys  the  sumo  thing  :  that tliere  must  be  many  varieties  of  protoplasm  witli  dilVcrcnt  qualities and  with  corresponding  different  molecular strncturL'  and  composition. Using  the  word  '"protoplasm''  in  this  sense,  it  is  oi'vious  that  the varieties  of  protoplasm  are  numerous  indeed,  almost  innumerable. The  molecular  protoplasm,  whicli  brings  forth  a  contractile  kata- state  must  difEer  in  nature,  in  composition,  that  is  in  construction from  glandular  protoplasm  wliere  kata-state  is  a  mother  of ferment.  Fur*  her  the  protoplaspi  of  a  swiftly  contracting  striped muscular  fibre  must  differ  from  that  of  the  torpid,  smooth,  unstriatcd fibre,  the  protoplasm  of  a  human  muscle  must  differ  from  that  of a  sheep  or  a  frog,  the  protoplasm  of  one  muscle  must  differ  from that  of  another  muscle,  in  the  aaine  kind  of  animal,  and  the  pro- toplasm of  Smith's  biceps  must  differ  from  that  of  Jone's— Foster.
Hi  ,,      INTRODUCTION.
Called   D/iaius    or    fundaraental    principles  of  the  economy, when  in  virtue  of  their   correlative   and    sustentative   func- tions,  or    with   the   help   of  their  subservient  processes  of metabolism  and  lymphatic  circulation,  they  ensure  an  equi- poise  among  the    diflferent  vital  and  physiological  processes in  the    u'hole    economy    which    is    essential    to    its    perfect health.     Biologically  considered  they  are    but    the    primary subtle   djniamics    of   organic    life,  or  as  Sayana  expresses  it, the  three  fundamental  principles  of  the   body.*     But  when this    healthy    equilibrium    is    disturbed  either    through  the agency   of  any  extrinsic  or  idiopathic  factor,  when  any  one of  them   is   abnormally    augmented  or  dominates  the  other two,  thus  altering  their   mutual    relation    in    the    economy, naturally  certain  pathological  conditions    arise    which    form the  esse  of  a  disease  ;  t  or  in  the  parlance  of  the  Ayurveda they   are   said    to    have    been    transformed  into  Doshas  or morbific  diathesis.     Even   blood,    which,  according    to   our Acharyayas,  forms  one  of  the  fundamental  principles  (Dhatu) of  the  organism,  may  be  designated    as    a    Dosha    (morbific diathesis),    when    owing    to   its  congestion  in  any  particular organ  or  member  of  the  body,  it  brings  about  a  disturbance in   its   general    vascular    system    and  produces  pathological conditions    which    are    offshoots    of     its   own     deficient    or disturbed  circulation.     They  are    denominated  as    MalaS,  \ when  observed  still    in  grosser    or    superficial    principles   of the     organism     producing    those    excretions,     or     organic lesions  which  appertain  to  the  sphere    of  morbid    Anatomy. Thus  we  see  that  the  Ayurvedic  principles  of  Vayu,    Pittam and  Kaphah    embrace  both     the    biological    and    pathologi-
.Sayanas  Commentary  Rig  ^^  1  A. Chanika.
INTRODUCTION.         .  Hli
»
cal  principles  of  the  organism  ;»  or  in  other  wOrds,  the Ayurvedic  physiology  elucidates  and  investigates  the causes  through  which  the  'same  principles,  which  sustain life  and  the  organism,  are  transformed  into  the  dynari\*ics of  disease,  lastly  pointing  out  the  grosser  excretory  changes and  organic  lesions  in  the  external  or  "superficial  plane  of existence,  which  form  thi  subject  of  morbid  anatomy  and are  sometimes  confounded  with  the  disease  itself.  In  the Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kaphah  of  the  Acharyayas  we  have  at once  a  complete  picture  of  the  finer  sustentative  forces  of the  human  economy  as  well  as  their  antithesis,  the  construc- tive as  well  as  the  expulsive  forces*  of  the  inner  man,  to- gether with  an  exhaustive  analysis  of  their  grosser  products which  legitimately  fall  within  the  sphere  of  morbid  ana- tomy. A  real  knowledge  of  the  nature  and  functions  of the  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kaphah  may  be  useful  in  giving  a deeper  and  clearer  insight  into  the  principles  of  true  biology or  pathology.  It  is  incorrect  to  translate  Vayu,  Pittam  and Kaphah  as  air,  bile  and  phlegm,  except  under  certain  cir- cumstances. Viyu,  Pittam  and  Kaphah  are  air,  bile  and phlegm  only  when  they  are  transformed  into  Malas  or grosser  organic  excretions  which  are  supposed  to  be so  very  intimately  connected  with  factors,  pathogenetic or  pathological,  but  they  are  not  air,  bile  and  phlegm  in those  planes  of  their  functions  which  determine  the  genesis, growth  and  continuance  of  the  organism,  as  w-ell  as  its death,  decay  and  disinteg  ation.  -The  knowledge  of  a region  without  that  of  its  antipodes  is  but  a  half  knowledge, and  the  principle  of  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kaphah  is  the  only one  of  its  kind  that  tries  to  embrace  the  whole  sphere  of organic  existence.
Ojah-Dh^tU  : — From  what  has  been  stated  before it  will  appear  that  during  the  process  of  tissu'e-formation, the  Ivmph  or  chyle,  under  the  influence  of  Pittam,  or metabolic  heat,  is  transformed  in^o  the  same,  the  refuse or  un-utilisable  portion  of  it  being    passed    off  through  the
liv  .         IN*rRODUCTION.
f
apertures  of  ihe  body,  is  excretions.  The  Ojah-Dhatu  is present  in  the  reproductive  energy  that  lies  latent  in  every organic  principle,  viz.  lymph,  blood,  muscles,  bone  (synovia), ma"Vro\v,  and  in  the  *male  &  female  reproductive  elements. Hence  it  is  not  a  matter  of  si.irprise  when  we  find  in  Ayur- vedic works  this  Sbma,  or  Ojah-Dhatu  mentioned  as  lying diffused  in  the  human  organism  aiVd  described  as  the  essence of  the  lymph  chyle,  blood,  &c.  (i).  The  terms  Rasagata Ojah,  Raktagata  Ojah  are  therefore  used  perhaps  in  the sense  of  modern  serum-albumen,  blood-albumen,  &c.  The male  &  female  reproductive  elements,  according  to  this view,  form  the  essence  of 'the  body  as  a  whole,  and  the  Ojah, which  is  abundantly  found  in  these  protoplasmic  cells,  is the  quintessence  of  a  quintessence.  The  muscle  of  the heart  alone,  according  to  Charaka,  is  chiefly  associated  with this  energetic  substance,  which  is  of  a  bloody  yellowish colour  &.  possesses  both  cooling  &  heat-making  virtues.  (2)
In  diseases  caused  by  defective  assimilation  it  is  said  to be  ejected  through  the  kidne\'s  and  to  pass  off  with  the  urine (as  in  certain  types  of  Prameha)  (3),  whereby  the  patient gradually  loses  strength,  flesh,  and  healthy  glow  of  complex- ion inasmuch    as  these  are    but  the  accompaniments   of   its
(l)     ^T\^  ^Wt^Tfprt  ^^JflTlt  RT'^^fW  I
Vagbhal .
=^3f:  aift?  ^wm'  tT^mrar  ftfjpfw  n
Charaka  (Sutra  StMnam)  Ch.  XVII. (3)      A.    ^?:mfJ?ll7T^ft^  ^I^T?I  JI^ff?f  I
^]  -^fm'  tT^  §f^  ^^^%:  ffWn  II •^  Charaka  (Sutra  Sthinam)  Ch,  XVII.
Charaka  (ShSrira  SthSnam)  Ch.  IV.
INTRODUCTieN.        ,  Iv
healthy  continuance  in  the  humi^n  organism.  "Health  and strength,"  observes  our  Rishi,"  reside  latent  in  the  Ojah- dhatu,  as  butter  (Ghritam)4ies  latent  in  milk,  (i)
Dallana  Mishra,  the  celebrated  commentator  of  the Sushruta  Samhita,  has  defined  Ojah  as  a  fatty  su6stance completely  combustible  in  its  character.  Thus  in  the course  of  tissue  combustion  its  excess  quantity  is  deposited especially  in  the  female  body  as  f.it  which  produces  that peculiar  softness  and  elegance.  (2)  The  presence  of  Ojah in  urine  is  said  to  induce  Madhumeha  (3).  Taking  this  fact alone  into  consideration  one  is  inclined  to  the  belief that  Ojah  must  be  something  "of  the  nature  of  sugar. As  a  consequence  of  these  diflFerent  interpretations  of Ojah  the  question  arises  whether  there  is  present  in  the human  organism  any  such  common  element  that  produces either  of  these  two  important  oxidising  materials,  viz.  fat and  sugar.
It  is  a  demonstrated  fact  in  modern  Physiology  that glycogen  is  found  in  other  tissues  and  organs  besides in  the  liver.  Tissues  of  embryos  and  of  young  animals as  well  as  newly  formed  pathological  growths  may  be  said to  contain  glycogen.  The  activity  of  the  heart,  as  well  as the  development  of  the    fetal  body  (4)  is  largely  dependent
(i)     A.  '^]w.  'FT^at^T'??'  %^  aftct*  f^T  f^ciH  I
Bh^VaprakSsha.    Part  I. BhSvaprakSsha.
Dallana  Mishra. (3)  See  Note  3  (B)  Page  iiv.  »
(4)    ^r\  ^TTmfl  "wsf  ^Tr^'Tff^m?^:  1
^TFr^TT-ffT'T'  ^?^'  ?1HlTr^^rrf  m  ^X\  II
Charaka  SutrasthSnam,  Chap.  XXX.
Ivi  ,  IN-TRODUCTION.
upon  this  Ojah-dhatu  which  may  be  best  translated  as glycogen  in-  the  parlance  of  Western  physiology.  In  fact, our  Acharyayas  have  used  tke  term  ''ojah"  to  denote  that xitzl  principle  in  the  organism  which  is  essential  to  the maintenance  of  a  healthy  combustion  in  its  tissues  and  to  the due  performance  of  their  normal  functions  and  activities,  no matter  whether  that  principle  is  patent  in  the  form  of  proto- plasm, protoplasmic  albumen,  glycogen  or  mucosin  (Prakrita shleshma)*  in  accordance  with  the  difference  of  their  func- tions, geneses,  and  conditions  of  protoplasmic  metabolism. In  short,  the}-  were  cognisant  of  the  fact  that  fat  and  sugar are  evolved  out  of  a  common  basic  principle  in  the  organism as  has  been  very  eruditely  demonstrated  by  Dr.  S.  N. Goswami,  B.  A.,  L.  M.  S.  in  his  treatise  on  Pumsavanam  t It  is  far  from  our  intention  to  thrust  this  opinion  on  an^' one  ;  we  have  simply  stated  our  conclusion  in  the  matter and  will  welcome  the  result  of  fresh  enquiries  on  this  subject.
Charaka  SamhitS  Sutrasth^nain,  Chap.  XVII.
Chakiadattas  Commentary  S.  Samhit^,  Sutrasthanam  Chap.  XV.
1^  "From  these  extracts  ii  appears  to  us  still  more  vividly  that  our countrymen  did  also  discover,  like  Dr.  Pavy,  the  importance  of fat  and  sugar  in  the  animal  economy,  as  well  as  the  mode  in  which  they can  be  elaborated  from  one  common  principle.  (76-78).  A  comparative study  of  the  two  systems  of  medical  science,  Indian  and  European, has  led  us  to  arrive  at  this  conclusion  ;  if  we,  therefore  are  not  inclined to  identify  Ojah  with  albumen,  as  it  has  been  done  by  some  modern Indian  commentators,  we  have  reasons  to  believe  that  the  aforesaid extracts  have  not  as  yet  received  sufficient  consideration  from  them,  as forming  the  nutri'ive  basis  of  the  procreative  elements  ;  in  short  the  subject has  hitherto  been  neglected  or,  at  least,  been  placed  in  the  back-ground, rom  want  of  attention  on  the  part  of  those  whose  business  it  was  to  investi- gate into  the  truths  of  Science.  To  hold  that  Ojah  is  kept  in  deposit  in the  heart,  as  a  reserved  food  material,  for  the  maintenance  of  its   own   work
INTRODUCTld^'.  »  Ivii
Space  does  not  permit  us  to  giVe  here  even  something like  a  satisfactory  synopsis  of  the  physiology  of  Sushruta. It  is  enough  for  our  purpose  if  we  can  create  for  our  readers an  interest  in  the  various  physiological  problems  discuss'ed by  our  author  in  this  part  of  his  work,  or  in  his  description of  the  various  physiological  processes,  which  are  essential to  the  healthy  continuance  of  human  economy.  But  if Hindu  physiology  is  startling   in  its    demonstration  of  the
as  well  as  for  the  production  of  germinal  seed,  is  to  admit  that  efficiency  of reproduction  depends  entirely  upon  the  efficiency  of  this  important  sub- stantt  in  the  body."J
(76)  ^?5%7>JT^SigTUT'?rf?T*TT^'  Tfl^tTmj
(77)  ?fT'  21^  fifW€tT#^:
(78)  ^??tSt2IT^?l'  '^^W.  q^TRTTRTW
—Ibid.
76.  Those  who  partake  of  heavy  and  cooling  food  abounding  in  acids  and salts,  of  new  rice,  and  beverages,  or  constantly  enjoy  sleep  and  luxuries,  or neglect  the  exercise  of  body  and  mind,  or  who  hal)itually  abstain  from  the use  of  corrective  medicines,  help  to  accumulate  in  their  bodiej  phlegm, bile,  fat  and  flesh  ;  and  these  interfere  with  the  functions  of  the  \'Ay\i, which  causes  the  Ojah  to  be  displaced  from  its  proper  place  down  in  the bladder   and  produces  glycosuria,
77.  As  Ghee  pervades  the  whole  of  milk,  so  Teja  (f^yah)  permeates all  the  tissues  of  the  body.
78.  Teja  (Ojah)  too  is  combustible  :  in  course  of  tissue-combustion,  the excess  quantity  of  it  gets  deposited  especially  in  the  female  body  as  fat which  produces  softness  and  elegance.
Iviii  ifiTRonucTioN.
c
fact  tha'L  growth  is  not  the  only  condition  of  Ufe,  that  vitali- ty is  somewhat  independent  of  the  physiological  processes, that  the  inner  man,  with  the  he4p  of  Yoga,  can  long  survive even  without  food  and  respiration,*  and  that  death  and decay" may  be  arrested  to  a  considerable  degree  by  com- pletely stopping  nfany  of  those  physiological  processes  in the  body,t  which  are  considered  ^j  very  essential  to  living by  the  savants  of  the  West,  then  Hindu  pathology  is  unique in  its  conception  of  the  nature  of  disease.
Sushruta's  Pathology  : — What  is  it  in  a  man,  asks  Sush- ruta,  that  falls  sick  ?  What  is  that  that  we  treat  medicinally  ? The  body  or  the  mind  ?  'Sushruta  says  that,  "anything  that afflicts  the  nmer  man  (self  or  Purusha)  is  disease!  and that  disease  has  its  primary  seat  in  the  inner  spring  of vitality  from  which  it  flows  out  to  the  surface,  the  external body".  In  man,  as  in  everything  else  in  the  universe, the  direction  of  the  inherent  force  is  from  the  centre  to the  circumference.  The  shock  is  felt  first  at  the  centre  of vitality,  whence  it  is  transmitted  outwards  and  thus  affects the  energy  which  holds  the  molecules  together,  Dvyanuks  and Tryanuks  (Binary  and  teriiary  atoms)  of  which  the  gross body  is  composed,  and  further  opposes  the  dissolution  of those  molecules  into  their  elemental  constituents  in  the  living organism.  Even  in  cases  of  external  injuries  such  as  snake- bite, etc.  the  potency  of  the  virus  is  carried  at  once  to  that centre  from  whence  it  is  almost  instantaneously  transmitted through  the  external  channels  of   the    body    to    its    surface,
ff^TTUr  *^^«  1
Palanjala  Uarshanani  X^ibhudpAda  29 — 30  A.
Pcitanjala  Daishanam.     Vibhutipada.  21.  A.
Sushruta  samhitA.     Sulra.     Chap.  1.
INTRODUCTION.         ,  lix'
>
Otherwise  what  purpose  does  the  \iyu  (nerve  force),5erve  in the  human  economy  ?  What  do  those  myriads  of  Chaitanya- vahini  Nadis  (sensory  ne,ivt^s)  exist  for  in  the  human system  ?  In  all  diseases  the  subjective  sensations  are  I'he first  to  be  experienced.  "I  am  ill,"  "I  feel  hot,"  etc.  are  the voices  of  sensations,  which  form  the  "esse"  of  the  disease. Disease  then  is  a  force  ar^d  not  matter.*
Pathology  of  Tridosha  :— Sushmta,  though  adopting the  Vedic  pathological  dictum  of  Tridhatu,  has  expressed a  very  clear  opinion  on  the  subject.  He  observes  that  the relation  between  a  disease  and  the  deranged  Vayu  (nerve force),  Pittam  (metabolism)  and  Kapham  (unutilised  product of  the  system),  and  the  pathogenic  factors  which  lie  at  the root  of  that  disease,  is  not  real  but  contingent.  These morbific  principles  may  permeate  the  whole  organism without  creating  any  discomfort,  and  it  is  only  when  they find  a  distinct  lodgment,  and  are  centred  in  some  distinct part  or  tissue  of  the  body,  that  they  become  the  exciting factors  of  disease.
Drug  Potency  :— The  next  question  which  naturally arises  in  connection  with  such  a  theory  of  pathogeny,  is what  is  medicine,  or  in  other  words,  what  is  it  in  the  drug that  cures  !  Sushruta,  after  closely  investigating  all  the theories  on  the  subject,  inclines  towards  the  opinion  that  it is  the  potency  of  the  drug  that  is  curative,  though  he  observes that  inasmuch  as  potency  cannot  exist  independently  of  a drug,  a  drug  is  of  primary  interest  for  p11  practical  purposes in  therapy.
Drug-Dynamisation  :-"It  is  the  potency  of  a  drug that  cures  a   disease".     The    potency    is    administered    best
*  That  Hahnemann's  theory  of  disea.se  was  long  before  fore- .shadowed  by  Sushruta,  will  appear  from  the  above  extracts  from  his works.  Hahnemann  observes  that,  when  a  person  falls  ill,  it  is  only this  spiritual  self-acting  vital  force,  everywhere  present  in  the  organism, that  is  primarily  deranged  by  the  dynamic  influence  of  a  morbific agent  inimical  to  life — Orgenon.
Ix  INiTRODUCTIOK.
c
when  the  physical  or  chqjmical  properties  of  a  drug  are annihilated.  This  "is  best  performed  by  subjecting  it  to heat  or  pressure.  In  the  n^edicated  Ghritas  or  oils  of ouv.pharmacopoea,  which  are  prepared  by  successively  boiling or  cocking  them  with  drug-decoctions,  we  cannot  even detect  the  trace  of  /Miy  of  its  component  drugs,  but  still we  know  how  potent  and  efficacious  they  prove  in  the hands  of  our  Vaidyas.  When  Sushruta  formulated  the process  of  preparing  mediciual  oils  and  Ghritas,  and  laid down  the  use  of  Shatadhautam  Ghritam  (clarified  butter, a  hundred  times  washed  with  water  in  succession), Sahasrapak  Tailam  (medicinal  oil,  successively  codked  a thousand  times),  or  Kumbha-Ghritam  (clarified  butter, a  hundred  years  old)  it  may  be  fairly  said  that  he  was  in sight  of  the  principle  of  drug-dynamisation.
Principles  of  A  yurvedic  Treatment:— Ayurvedic  phy- sicians piacticallv  recognise  two  dififerent  sets  of  principles in  the  domain  of  practical  therapeutics,  which  may  be  stated in  the  terms  of  ::heir  western  colleagues  as  Laws  of  Similars and  Contraries.*  This  apparent  contradiction  has  been fully  accounted  for  and  explained  in  the  writings  of the  latter  day  commentators,  but  it  does  not  fall  within our  province  to  enter  into  these  disquisitions.  In  addition to  those,  Sushruta,  in  common  with  the  Acharyayas  of  his time,    never    fails    to    emphasise  the  value  of  psycopathy  in
*  Similar  in  ch.iracter  to  the  exciting  factors  of  a  disease — Similar  in character  to  the  £sse  of  a  disease — Similar  in  character  both  to  the  exciting actors  and  £i>\se  of  a  disease.
Contrary  in  character  to  the  exciting  factors  of  a  disease.
Contrary  in  character  to  the  £sse  of  a  disease.
Contrary  in  character  both  to  the  exciting  factors  and  Esse  of  a  disease.
M^dhava  NidSnam  Ch  I.  V,  8.
INTRODUCTION.       ^  1X1
those  forms  of  mental  or  nerv;ous  distempers  fgr  which Mesmer  rightly  now  receives  so  n\uch  honor.  Since the  creation  of  man,  the  tput'h  of  the  "Saintly"  has  been credited  with  the  virtue  of  curing  the  sick  ;  and  Av^feha (auto-hypnotism)  and  Samadhi  (higher  phases  of  ciairvoy- ance)  have  achieved  many  miracles  in .  the  art  of  healing in  India,  which  was  the,  first  country  where  it  was  first successfully  practised  for  the  welfare  of  man.
Samshodhanam  and  Samshamanam  :— All  kinds  of treatment  may  be  grouped  under  two  heads  such  as  Sam- shodhanam and  Samshamanam,  i.e.  either  the  body  should be  cleansed  (Samshodhitam)  of  the  morbific  diathesis  with the  help  of  emetics  or  purgatives,  or  steps  should  be  taken to  restore  the  deranged  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham  to  their normal  condition  with  the  help  of  proper  medicinal  drugs without  resorting  to  any  eliminating  process.  But  in  cases of  inflammation,  Sushruta  enjoins  that,  instead  of  any  Sam- shamanam remedies,  diaphoresis  should  be  first  resorted  to. In  cases  where  counter-irritants  are  indicated  and  in  parts which  are  directly  accessible,  leeching  and  cauterisation should  be  practised  with  a  due  regard  to  the  season  of  the year  and  the  requirements  of  the  case.  We  find  in  his Samhita  a  detailed  account  of  the  several  species  of  leeches with  their  habits  and  habitats.
Forms  of  medicine:  — Powders,  lambatives,  decoctions as  well  as  medicated  oils,  Ghritas,  confection  and  wines  are the  forms  in  "-hich,  according  to  Sushruta,  medicines should  be  given.  The  different  di  ugs  such  as  roots,  leaves, etc.  should  be  culled  in  the  seasons  proper  to  each. Reclassified  the  soil  into  five  different  kinds  for  the  purpose of  growing  drugs  of  different  therapeutic  properties. Even  the  virtues  of  different  flavours  and  colours  were ascertained  with  regard  to  their  respective  actions  on  the deranged  morbific  principles  of  the  body.
Rasayanam  : — The  Ayurveda  being  the  science  of  life and  health,  the  holy  Agnivesha,  at  the  very  commencement
Ixii  ,     INTRODUCTION.
ot  the  th-erapeutical  porticMi  of  his  work,  *  has  described several  medicinal  compounds,  which  improve  general  health and  arrest  the  ravages  of  time.  '  Theoretically  speaking  the sciehrce  of  the  A3'urveda  recognises  no  preordained  limit  to human  fexistence.  Life  can  be  prolonged  with  the  help of  suitable  medicines.  By  dint  of  observation  and  patient researches  our  Rishis  devised  maay  such  adjuncts  which can  rejuvenate  an  old  man,  and  supply  those  vital  elements to  an  old  and  exhausted  human  body,  which  ebb  away with  the  progress  of  years.  Hence,  we  find  many rejuvenating  medicines  to  have  been  prescribed  for  men  in health  which  would  arrest  decay  and  guard  against  the approach  of  senility  b}'  increasing  the  fundamental  vital principles  of  the  body  and  preventing  Vayu,  Pittam  and Kapham  from  being  transformed  into  morbific  diatheses.
Diet  — "A  good  and  proper  diet  in  disease  is  worth a  hundred  medicines  and  no  amount  of  medication  can  do good  to  a  patient  who  does  not  observe  a  strict  regimen  of diet.''  Our  A'jairveda,  instead  of  being  content  with  specify- ing the  nature  of  diet  in  diseases  in  general,  mentions  the names  of  articles,  which  should,  or  should  not  be  taken  in ■^J  any  specific  malady,  judged  by  the  light  of  their  properties of  aggravating  Vayu,  Pittam  or  Kapham.  The  dietic  or therapeutic  properties  of  a  large  number  of  articles  of human  consumption,  as  well  as  the  chemical  changes  they undergo  in  the  digestive  apparatus  of  diflferent  mammals, have  been  studied  and  analysed,  and  so  we  find  in  our physique,  medical  Samhitas,  such  injunctions  that  barley- corns    passed     undigested     with  _  the    fceces    of    a    cow    or
flwi^ii'  J?^t[z^^^'  ^^^n  ^^'  ^x  w
Chaiaka  Sanihit^t  Chikitsrt  Slli4nam  Ch     I,
)NTKuDUC'?ioN.    >  Ixiii
>
horse,  should  foiiu  the  diet  of  'a  Prameha  patielit  *  that the  milk  of  a  she-camel  should  be  given  to  a  patient suffering  from  a  cutaneous  aflFection,  and  that  the  flesh of  any  carnivorous  beast  or  bird  should  be  given  to 'one suffering  from  pulmonary  consumption  and  so  '  on.  It was  a  cardinal  doctrine  with  Ayurvedic  dietisls  that  the longing  of  a  patieni  for  any  particular  kind  of  food in  a  certain  disease,  emphatically  shows  that  his  organism is  in  want  of  those  elements  which  enter  into  the composition  of  the  article  offered.  Hence  elaborate dietetics  were  formulated,  which  cannot  but  be  acceptable to  the  most  fastidious  patient.      '
Therapeutics:— The  exclusiont  of  salt  and  water  from the  food  of  an  ascites  or  anasarca  patient  as  laid  down  in our  Samhitas  shows  that  our  Rishi  possessed  a  higher chemical  knowledge  regarding  the  effects  of  organic  matter on  the  human  system  than  many  of  us  are  ready  to accord  to  these  pioneers  in  medical  science.
Medical  Botany;— After  therapeutics  comes  the  subject of  Medical  Botany.     Sushruta  divides   the  whole  vegetable
Charaka  Samhiti,  Chikiisa  Sthanam,  Ch.  \'I.  23. t    The  efficacy  of  such    exclusion    has   been  lately  demonsU-ated  by  the researches   of  Dr.  Benjamin    Horniman    (Lectures,    Sanitarium,    Park    si. London.)
Charaka  Chikitsha  Sthanam  Ch,  XIIL ^bid    Chap.  13.
Charaka  Chikitsha  Sthanam  Chap,  1 2.
Ixiv  ■  f      INTRODUCTION.
kingdom  into  Vriksha,  Gultlia,  Vanaspati  and  Virudha.  This classification  has  been  minutely  worked  out  in  works  on Hindu  Botany  where  we  find  si!ich  nice  subdivisions  as r  Agravija  (whose  toplings  are  only  planted),  Mulaja  (whose roots  only  are  planted),  Parnayoni,  Skandaja,  Vijaruha  (ger- minated from  seeds)  ^nd  Sannurudhaja.  But  the  botany  of /    Sushrnta  is  more  of  the  nature    of  a"  Materia    Medica    than
/  a  work  on  Botany  proper,  though  sometimes  he  mentions the  habitat  and  describes  the  foliage  of  certain  plants  so that  they  may  be  distinguished  from  others  of  a  cognate species. ,  ^  The  uses  of  metals  and  'minerals  for  therapeutical  pur- poses in  India  are  as  old  as  the  Rigveda  *  itself.  Sush- ruta  describes  the  methods  of  preparing  oxides,  sulphates or  chlorides  of  the  six  metals  as  the  case  may  be.  Mercury has  been  only  once  mentioned  in  the  Samhita  and  then  very vaguely  too.  Processes  for  the  preparation  of  alkalis  and the  lixiviation  of  ashes  are  very  elaborately  described. Beyond  these  the  chemical  knowledge  of  Sushruta  scarcely extends.
Hygiene  and  Public  Health:— A?  a  writer  of  Hygiene and  public  health,  Sushruta  emphasises  the  importance of  cleanliness  of  both  sririt  and  body.  Water  whose disinfecting  virtues  have  so  often  been  hymnised  in  the Vedas  t  forms  the  subject  of  discussion  of  an  entire chapter  of  the  Samhita.  Outbreaks  of  epidemic  have  been attributed  to  contrary   seasons,    to    the   floating   of  minute
^/\  particles  of  poisonous  flower  pollen  in  the  air,  and  to  the sin  or  unrighteous  conduct  of  the  community.  Earthquakes, famines,  and  physical  phenomena,  which  are  at  present  attri- buted to  magnetic   disturbances   of  the   earth,   have    been
*    Lead  crystal  (including  diamond)  gold  and  mineral  poisons  arc  men- tioned in  the  I.  i6.  I.  29.  I  55.  and  IV  10.  of  the  Atharva  SamhitA.
Rik  Samhiti  I.  23  s.  19,
INTRODUCTION.  '  IxV
described  by  Sushi ut a  as  the  usual  precursors  of  devastating epidemics  sucli  as  jilague  etc.  Mortality  among  birds  and  an unusual  death  among  rats  and  other  burrowing  rodents  hav^ been  iricluded  aiuo.ig  other  presaging  indications  of  a  visi- tation by  Providence.  Interrogated  as  to  the  cause  of  such outbreaks,  Dhanvautari  observes  that,  the  Viyu  (molecular energy)  of  the  soi'  is  disturoed  or  affected  by  earthquakes, and  seasons  of  unnatural  drought  or  deluge,  deranging  their Pittam  (kinetic  energy)  and  Shleshma  (humidity)  which produce  morbific  factors  that  affect  a  whole  community. Sushyuta,  as  a  true  physician,  has  elaborately  dealt  with  the regimen  of  diet  and  conduct  during  the  different  seasons of  the  year  (Ch.  24  -U.  T.  64)  which,  strictly  followed,  should act  as  a  good  prophylaxis  against  attacks  of  many  epidemic diseases,  being  framed  with  a  most  careful  regard  to  the conditions  of  life  which  obtain  in  it,  and  ward  off  those  sad breakdowns  in  health,  which  are,  in  many  instances,  the result  of  an  unsuitable  mode  of  living  in  this  country.
Twofold  division  of  Time  &C  :— It  is  a  fundamental dictum  of  Sushruta  that  in  a  case  of  medical  treatment  the then  prevailing  season  of  the  year  should  be  taken  into account.  In  his  Samhita  we  find  two  distinct  classifications of  seasons,  one  based  on  the  peculiar  physical  pheno- mena which  distinguish  the  different  seasons  of  the  year,  a  fact which  emphaticall}' proves  that  Sushruta  was  an  inhabitant of  the  sub-Himalayan  Gangetic  Doab,  the  other  is  for  the purpose  of  showing  the  respective  accumulation,  aggrava- tion and  subsidence  of  morbific  diatheses  (Doshas).  In the  same  manner  the  different  quarters  of  the  day  and night  have  been  minutely  charted  or  set  down  to  show  the spontaneous  aggravation  and  subsidence  of  the  deranged Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kaphah  during  the  24  l^ours.  The!  , influence  of  planets  as  to  the  production  of  certain  diseases such  as  small-pox,  measles,  scarlet  fever,  &c.  is  almost  a proved  fact.  As  it  governs  the'  prevalence  and  non- prevalence     of    certain     maladies,   the     aggravation     and
9
Ixvi  INTRODUCTION.
non-aggravation  of  certain  existing  disorders  as  well  owe much  of  tb.eir  origin  to  this  potent  factor.  The  vegetable kingdom  from  which  we  glean  our  daily  food  is  also  subject to  thi?  influence,  and  hence  the  discrimination  we  exercise in  selecting  our  food  on  certain  davs  of  the  lunar  month.
Countries  have  been  divided  into  Jangala  or  A'nr.pa  ac- cording as  their  physical  features  partake  of  the  character of  a  dry  plateau  or  of  a  swamp  or  marsh,  a  Sadharana one  possessing  features,  which  are  common  to  both.  Diseases, which  are  natural  or  are  spontaneously  relieved  in  each  of these  kinds  of  countr}-  have  been  treated  with  that  scienti- fic insight  which  marks  modern  medical  works  on  sea-side or  spring  sanitariums.  The  virtues  of  the  waters  of  different rivers  of  India  were  ascertained  for  the  purposes  of  practical therapeutics.  The  therapeutic  properties  of  the  milk  of a  she-goat,  she-buflFalo,  mare,  cow-elephant,  or  woman,  as well  as  of  any  of  their  modifications  such  as  curd,  whey  &c. together  with  the  properties  of  the  flesh  and  urine  of  the several  groups  of  she-animals,  which  are  indigenous  to the  land,  were  studied  and  analysed,  thus  placing  at  the disposal  of  a  practical  physician  a  list  of  dietarv  in different  diseases  to  soothe  the  taste  of  the  most fastidious  patient,  and  which  is  at  the  same  time  potent enough  to  cure  the  distemper  he  is  suffering  from  without the  help  of  anj?^  special  medicine.  Thus  it  is  that  we  find  our Vaid\'as  prescribing"  the  flesh  of  many  carnivorous  animals as  a  diet  in  consumption,  goat's  meat  in  phthisis,  goat's milk  in  colitis  and  Tittira's  flesh  in  fever  &c.
Diseases  of  the  Kidneys  and  Bladder:  — In  treating of  the  diseases  of  the  kidneys,  blatlder  and  the  urethra, Sushruta  has  described  the  symptoms  and  the  colour  of the  urine  irii  each  specific  variety  without  laying  down  any mode  of  testing  the  urine.  But  we  know  that  Sn^hruta  has enjoined  his  readers  at  the  ver}-  outset  of  his  work  to  refer to  other  allied  branches  of  the  science  for  information which  is  not    contained    in   his  book.     In  the  same  manrier
INTRODUCTION'.  Ixvii
we  can  account  for  the  absence  of.^  any  instiuctions  as regards  the  feeling  of  the  p'j'>se  as  an  important  auxiliary in  making  a  correct  diagnosis.  We  need  but  repeat  -.the statement  that  the  readers  of  this  Samhita  must  look  for this  information  in  the  Kanada's  Nadi  Vijnanam,  which  has made  our  Vaidyas  such  expert  sphygmologists.
Kalpa:  — In  the  Kalpasth:inam  of  his  Samhita,  Sushruta has  described  the  symptoms  of  hydrophobia  and  snake  bites, etc  as  well  as  those  developed  in  cases  of  vegetable  poisoning, together  with  their  therapeutical  treatment  and  remedies, wkich,  if  rightly  studied  and  investigated,  may  yet  throw  a new  liglit  upon  the  subject.
Sushruta  as  an  Observer  :— It  has  been  lately  dis- covered by  a  German  physiologist  that  tubercular  bacilli  do not  thrive  in  goat's  blood.  The  importance  of  goat's  milk in  colitis  as  an  efficient  agent  in  checking  ferment  in  the intestines,  or  of  the  close  contact  of  a  goat  as  a  powerful auxiliary  in  curing  tuberculous  phthisis  was  first  demonstrated by  Sushruta.  Not  onl}'  this — but  the  inhalation  of  the air  of  a  cattle-shed  and  especially  the  fact  that  exhalations of  goats,  bodies  tend  to  destroy  the  phthisis  germs  did not  fail  to  attract  the  attention  of  the  Indian  Rishis  ;  the fumigation  of  tlie  sick-room  with  antiseptic  preparations such  as  isT^T^wq  (Asthanga  dhupas)  is  purely  Indian in  its  origin  and  in  no  way  inferior  to  the  modern  introduction of  Cogghill's  respirators.  The  microscopic  germs  that  are  said to  propagate  septic  fever  otherwise  called  ^^^crrfvf  q^'lsj  f^^^j^ are  found  very  often  to  disappear  under  this  Indian device  where  no  medicines  produce  any  impression.  Thus many  a  wonderful  discovery  like  the  above  hails  from  the dimness  of  a  bygone  age.  Manj'  truths  lie  embedded in  the  vast  medical  literature  of  the  Brajimanas  which claimed  close  attention  and  devout  study,  even  by  the western  savants.  We  have  not  laboured  in  vain  if  these pages  can  help  a  little  to  reviVe  the  old  genius  of  the Ayurveda,  or  help  the  progress  of  human  Science  one  step onward  towards  the  attainment  of  its  goal.
PLATE  No.  I,
1.  An^uli  yantra.
i '^     3 .  Ashmaryaharna  yantra
S-Bhrin^amuklia  yantra.
Z.Arsho  yantra.
M^HP^^PKf^^P^^H^
4.  Basti  yantra.
6 .  Darvyakritislialaka.
7.  Garbhashanlcu  yantra.
8.  Jalodar  yantra.
9 .  Kakamuklia  yantra.
10 .  Kankamukha  yantra.
ILMuclititi  yantra.
^
12.  Nadi  yantra.
13 .  Riksliaraukha-  yantra.
14-.  Sadansha  yantra.
SEE  CHAPTER  VII.
PLATE  No.  II.
15 .  Shamipatra  yautra.
16.  Shalaka  vanira.
17.  Sliarapunka  ixmkha.
19.  Shvanaraukha  y antra.
18.  Sinliainiiklia  yantra.
20.  Shanku  yantra.
21.  Snuhi  yantra.
22.  Tila  yantra.
23  .Tarakshumukha.
24.Vrikaiimkha  yantra.
25 .  Vrinapraksii.alana  yantra,  26 .  Yya^hramukha  yantra
27. Yugmaslianku yantra.  -  %k  ,,^M  Yofljaveksliana  yantra.
SEE  CHAPTER  VII.
PLATE  No.  III.
l.Ardhadhara  shastra.
S.Ara  sliastra.
Z.Atimukha    shastra. 4.  Badisha.  shastra.
^
S.Dantaslianku  shastra.
7.  Karapatra  shastra.
^     '
<!>-
6.  Eshani  shastra.
8.  Antarmukha  kartarika.
J^aSKrJsniKU
SEE  CHAPTER  VIII.
I
PLATE  No.  IV.
9.Kritharika  sTiastra.
1E^&£
lO.Kushapatra   shastra.
ll.Manda.la^ra  shastra.     ♦
12.Mudrika  shastra.
13.Na.kiia  shastra.
.  <5' -^
14.  Sliaianmuklia  shastra.
15.  Suchi    shastra.
'^— J=
iS.Trikurchaka  shastra.
17.  Utpalapatra  shastra.    J'j|
18.  Vetaspatra  shastra.
19 . Yrihimukha  shastra.
ZO.Vndhipatra  shaslra.
SEE  CHAPTER   VIII.
CONTENTS.
CHAPTER  I.
Origin  of  the  Ayurveda  : — The  eight  divisions  of  the  Ayurveda and  the  characteristic  features  of  each  of  them — History  of  Surgery and  its  primary  importance — Gradual  exteiisi(jn  of  the  Ayurveda — Definition  of  Purusha — Classification  of  the  mobile  and  the  im- mobile— Definition  and  classification  of  disease — Classification  of Oshadhis — ^The  four  factors  to  be  employed  in  successfully  coping with 'a  disease — The  four  stages  of  a  disease       ...  ...     1 — 15
CHAPTER  n.
Initiation  of  a  student  of  the  Ayurveda  :— Qualifications  of  a student  of  medicine — ]\Iode  of  Initiation — Compact  between  the preceptor  and  his  disciple — Proliibited  periods  of  the  study  of  the Ayurveda     ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     16 — 20
CHAPTER  III.
Classification  of  the  Ayurveda  &c.  :— The  distribution  of  its hundred  and  twenty  chapters  among  the  five  subdivisions  of  .this Samhita — A  synopsis  of  the  contents  of  the  cliapters  allotted  to each  of  its  subdivisions — Skilful  and  unskilful  phj^sicians — The mode  of  studying  the  Ayurveda — Duties  of  a  pupil  after  having finished  the  study  of  the  Ayurveda  ...  ...     21 — .^2
CHAPTER.  IV.
General  explanations  : — Necessity  of  a  clear  exposition  of  tlie Ayurveda — Defects  which  flow  from  nonexposition  of  the  same — Duties  of  a  student  of  the  Ayurveda  ...  ...     33 — 35
ii  '  (  ONTRNTS.
CHAPTER  V.
Preliminary  surgical  measures  : — Classification  of  surgical ope^-ations — Accessories  which  are  to  be  collected  at  the  outset — Qualifications  of  a  surgeon — Modes  of  incision,  etc.  at  the  different parts  of  the  body — Measures  to  be  adopted  after  surgical  operations — The  prophylactic  Mantra — Directions  for  dressing  wounds  and removing  bandages  according  to  tlie  nature  of  the  prevailing  season of  the  year — Acts  and  articles  proliibited  to  a  patient  with  a granuliiting  wound — Measures  for  removing  the  pain  in  a  surgical wound  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     30 — 44
CHAPTER  VI.
Characteristic  features  of  the  different  seasons  of  the  year and  their  influence  on  health  and  drugs  : — Time  and  its  traits- Etymology  of  the  term  Kala  (time) — Divisions  of  time  and  classifica- tion of  the  seasons  of  the  year,  witli  Iheir  respective  features. Classification  of  the  seasons  of  the  year  for  the  purposes  of  the Ayurveda — Inception,  aggravation  or  subsidence  of  the  deranged Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham  according  to  the  nature  of  the  prevailing season  of  the  year — Aggravation  or  subsidence  of  the  same  in  the dilferent  qiuirters  of  the  day  and  night — Causes  of  epidemics — Pro- phylactic measures — Features  of  natural  or  unnatural  seasons     45 — 55
CHAPTER  YII.
Surgical  appliances,  their  use  and  construction  : — Number of  surgical  instruments — Names,  dimensions^  use  and  functions  of surgical  appliances  with  points  of  their  respective  excellence  or  defect — Minor  siu'S'ical  accessories — Excellence  of  Kankaraukha  ...     56 — 03
CHAPTER  VIII.
Surgical  instruments,  and  their  names,  use  and  construc- tion : — Mode  of  handling  th^  different  surgical  instruments. — Their commendable  features — Sharpening,  edging  and  tempering,    etc..    of
CONTENTS.  '  111
surgical  instruments  and  enumeration  of  cases  where  they  »should  be employed     ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     64 — 70
CHAPTER  IX.
Practice  of    surgery  : — Ti'iichiiig   oi'   siir^^ery    on    (iiiiniiiies    ami suitable  fruits,  etc.         ...     ,  ...  ...  ...     71—73
CHAPTER  X.
Essential  qualifications  of  a  physician  before  he  formally cntirs  his  profession: — Means  of  diagnosis — Things  to  be  observed in  making  a  diagnosis — Cure,  palliation  and  incurability  of  diseases — Prohibited  conduct  of  a  physician  ...  ...     74 — 77
CHAPTER  XI.
Mode  of  preparing  alkalis,  and  their  comparative  excellence as  incising,  excising  or  scraping  agents  :— Alkalis  for  external application  or  internal  use — Cases  where  alkalis  prove  injurious — The three  potencies  of  alkalis  for  external  application — Commendable or  defective  features  in  an  alkali  — IMode  of  its  application,  and  after- measures— Symptoms  of  satisfactory  cauterisation— Persons  who should  not  be  treated  with  alkalis — Dangers  which  attend  its abuse  ...  ...  ...  ...  ■••     78—87
CHAPTER  XII.
Actual  cauteries  : — Accessories  to  an  act  of  cauterisation — Pre- liminary measures— Symptoms  which  manifest  themselves  as  the skin,  or  flesh,  or  a  vein,  or  joint  is  cauterised — Seats  of  caifterisation in  different  diseases— Different  modes  of  cauterisation— Characteristic symptoms  of  burns  and  scalds,  etc.— Rationale  of  treating  a  burn  or a  scald  with  heat— Medical  treatment  of  burns  and  scalds,  etc.— Symptoms  which  appear  when  the  nostrils,  etc.  of  a  person  is  choked with  smoke— Its  treatment— Medical  treatment  of  sun  strikes,  and scorchings  by  hot  Avind,  etc.  ...  ...     88 — 97
IV  ,  UONTENTS.
CHAPTER  XIII.
Leeches  and  their  use  : — Persons  who  may  be  leeched — Mode of  extracting  the  vitiated  blood  in'  such  cases — Mode  of  apply- ing the  leeches — Classification,  and  mode  of  collecting  and  keep- ing the  leeches — Bad  leeches  and  their  characteristics — After- measures    ...  ,,..  ...  ...  ...     98 — 105
CHAPTER  XIV.
Origin  and  characteristic  features  of  lymph  chyle  .-—Its location,  course  and  metamorphosis  into  blood — Menstrual  blood and  its  nature — Successive  .metamorphosis  of  the  fundamental principles  of  the  body — Etymology  of  the  terra  Dhatu — Blood — Swellings  which  should  not  be  bled — Two  kinds  of  blood  letting— \'enesectioii,  its  mode  and  different  aspects — ]\Iischief  created  by  the vitiated  blood  not  extracted  from  the  system — Causes  of  excessive bleeding  and  its  effect  upon  the  system — Symptoms  of  satisfactory l)leeding  and  its  benertcial  results — Measures  to  be  adopted  in  cases of  excessive  or  scanty  bleeding — Medical  treatment  of  excessive bleeding — Various  instructions      ...  ...  ...     106 — 110
CHAPTER  XV.
Development  or  non-development  of  the  excrements  and constituent  principles  of  thebody:— Nature,  locations  and  functions of  the  Normal  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham,  as  well  as  of  the  lymph chyle,  blood,  fat,  marrow,  semen,  and  ojah  (albumen),  and  the  symp- toms which  mark  their  increase,  decrease,  or  disiodgment  in  the human  system — Etiologies  of  obesity  and  thinness  ...     120 — 140
CHAPTER  XVI.
Piercing  and  bandaging  of  the  lobules  of  ears  t — Evils  wliich attend  the  acc\dental  hurting  of  a  local  vein — Medical  unguents  and lints — Different  processes  of  bringing  about  the  adhesion  of  a bifurcated  ear-lobe — plastic  and  rhinuplastic  operations  ...     141 — 154
CONTENTS.'  «  V
CHAPTER  XVII.
Distinction  between  suppurat\ng  and  non-suppurating  swell- ings : — Different  types  of  intiammatory  swellings  produced  by  the deranged  Vayu,  Pittani,  etc  ,  and  the  symptoms  which  mark  their respective  actions  in  each  type — Characteristic  symptoms  of  a suppurating,  suppurated,  or  non-suppurated  !5welling — Hints  on  in cising  suppurated  swellings-r-Evils  of  opening  an  abscess  at  its inflammatory  stage — Feeding  and  anftsthetising  of  a  patient  before lancing  otf  an  abscess — Classification  of  surgical  operations  in connection  with  an  abscess  ...  ...  ...     155 — 161
CHAPTER  XVIII.
Dressings  and  bandages  of  ulcers  : — Classification  of  medicinal plasters  according  to  their  thickness,  application  and  function — Use of  the  different  types  of  plasters — Articles  of  bandaging — Bandages and  their  names  and  applications — Tow — Mode  of  introducing  a lint — Renewals  of  bandages  according  to  the  nature  of  the  ulcer and  the  prevailing  season  of  the  year — Evils  of  non-bandaging — Benefits  of  bandaging — Cases  where  bandaging  is  prohibited — Hints on  the  proper  lubrication  of  the  lint — Incidental  remarks  on  the bandaging  of  fractured  or  dislocated  bones   ...  ...     162 — 175
CHAPTER  XIX.
Nursing  and  management  of  an  Ulcer-patient  : — Nature  ot  his bed  and  chamber— Articles  prohibited  to  an  ulcer  patient — Prophylaxis against  monsters  and  demons — Diet  and  conduct  of  an  ulcer- patient      ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     176—182
CHAPTER  XX.
Salutary  and  Non-salutary  effects  of  regimen,  etc.  : — Classi- fication (if  all  articles  of  fare  according  as  they  are  wholesome  or unwholeseme  to  the  human  system,  or  are  relatively  wholesome or  otherwise — Foodstuff' — Incompatibility  through  combination — Injuriousness     through    combination- Incompatibility    through    pre-
VI  .  "CONTENTS.
paration,' quantity  or  Havour-rEffect  of  winds  on  the    human  system as  they  blow  from  the'ditierent  quarters  of  the  heaven  ...     183—193
CHAPTER  XXI.
The  deranged  Vaf/u,  Pittam,  etc.,  as  the  exciting  causes  of ulcers  : — Seats  of  Vayu,  Pittam,  etc.  in,  the  human  body,  and  their functions— Different  kinds  of  Vayii,  Pittam  and  Shleshma,  and  their functions  and  locations  in  the  economy  of  nature — Factors  which aggravate  the  deranged  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham,  and  their periodicity — Symptoms  of  the  deranged  Pittam,  Kapham  and  blood — Expansion  of  the  deranged  Vayu,  Pittam,  etc..  and  diseases  dye  to their  incarceration  in  the  difterent  parts  of  the  body — Disease — its development  and  occasions  which  necessitate  the  calling  in  of  medical aid — The  nature  of  medical  treatment  in  the  case  where  two  or  all  of the  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham  are  involved  ...  ...     194 — 211
CHAPTER  XXII.
Secretions  from  boils  and  ulcers  : — Shapes  and  seats  of  boils etc. — Symptoms  of  bad  ulcers — Secretions  from  ulcers — Presumption as  to  the  derangement  of  Vayu,  etc.  from  the  nature  of  the  secretion — Different  kinds  of  pain  wliich  mark  the  different  types  of  ulcers — Colours  of  Ulcers        ...  ...  ...  ...     212—219
CHAPTER  XXIII.
Prognosis  in  ulcer  cases  -.—Easy  curability  of  an  ulcer— Symp- toms of  an  ulcer  which  readily  granulates— Symptoms  of  difficult or  incurable  types,  as  well  as  of  those  which  admit  only  of  palliation  — Symptoms  of  a  purified,  granulating  or  healed  ulcer — Factors  which lead  to  the  reopening  of  a  healed  ulcer  ...  220—227
CHAPTER  XXIV.
Classification  of  diseases  according  as  they  are  medical  or surgical  :— Further  classitica'tioii  uf  diseases  according  as  they  arc congenital,   etc.— Diseases   due  to    mental,    physical    or    providential
CONTENTS.  »
causes — Diseases  due  to  the  derangeinent  of  lymph  chj-'je,  etc. — Relation  between  fever  and  the  deranged  '  Vaj'u,  Pittam  and Kapham    ...  ...  ...,  ...  ...     228—237
CHAPTER  XXV.
Eight  different  forms  of  surgical  operation  : — Cases  where incision,  excision,  scarification,  aspiration,  extraction,  etc.,  should  be respectively  resorted  to — Mode  and  conditions  of  suturing — Defec- tive surgical  operations — Symptoms  wliich  mark  tiie  injudicious hurting  of  a  vein,  artery,  lig.'iment,  joint  or  lione,  as  well  as  those which  are  manifested  when  any  of  tlie  other  Alarmas  is  accidentally hurt  '       ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     238—246
CHAPTER  XXVI.
Exploration  of  splinters,  deep-seated  in  the  organism  : — Defi- nition of  a  Shalyam — Clpssification  of  the  shafts  of  arrows — Flights of  arrows — Characteristic  symptoms  of  arrow-wounds— Localisation of  a  shaft  of  arrow  lying  imbedded  in  the  body — Symptoms  which show  that  the  shaft  or  the  splinter  does  not  lie  imbedded  in  the wound — Evils  cf  not  extracting  the  shaft  of  an  arrow  from  such a  wound    ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     247— 2.o5
CHAPTER  XXVII.
Extraction  of  splinters  : — Fifteen  different  processes  of  extrac- '1— Two  recognised  modes  of  extracting  splinters  from  all  types  of mds— Measures  to  be  adopted  after  the  extraction — Mode  of acting  splinters  from  veins,  etc.—  Dangers  of  not  extracting 'inter  from  a  wound  ...  ...  ...     2^6 — 265
CHAPTER  XXVIII.
vourable  or  unfavourable  prognosis  of  an  julcer: — Fatal avourable  symptoms — Advisability  of  abandoning  ihe  patient hese  unfavouraole  symptoms  appear  ...  ...     266 — 269
VIU  ,  •"CONTENTS.
CHAPTER  XXIX.
Favourable  or  unfavourable  prognosis  in  diseases  as  known from  messengers,  omens,  birds  of  happy  or  evil  augury  : — The same  predicted  from  dreams,  etc. — Remedies  for  inauspicious  dreams under  the  circumstance— Description  of  auspicious  dreams    270 — 283
CHAPTER  XXX.
Prognosis  that  can  be  obtained  from  the  perverted  functions of  the  five  sense  organs  : — Arislitas  or  unfavourable  mental  symp- toms— Unfavourable  symptoms  in  connection  with  the  faculties  of hearing,  touch,  taste,  smell  or. sight  ...  ...     284—287
CHAPTER  XXXI.
Prognosis  to  be  gathered  from  the  altered  condition  of features  : — Other  Aristha  symptoms  in  connection  with  Asthma, Cough,  and  (Edema.  &c.  ...  ...  ...     288—292
CHAPTER  XXXII.
Prognosis  based  on  the  perversion  of  the  external  appearances of  the  body  and  other  Arishta  symptoms  ...  ...     293 — 297
CHAPTER  XXXIIf.
Incurable  diseases,  and  Incurable  symptoms  developed  in  con- nection with  diseases  of  the  nervous  systems,  morbid  urethral discharges,  Leprosy,  Haamorrhoids  : — Fistula  in  ano — Urinarj' concretions,  DitKcult  labour,  Ascites,  Fever,  Dysentery,  Phthisis, abdominal  glands,  Abscess,  Chlorosis,  Ha?moptysis,  Insanity  and Epilepsy  ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     298—302
CHAPTER  XXXIV.
Mode  of  preserving  the  Ii<e  of  a   king  whose   soldiers  are   on
the  march  : — The  four  factors  of   medical  treatment — Good  which
CONTENTb.
lebiiUs  from  a  butitifuolory  coiiibinaliun  oi  all  tlieso  lour  facloib — Commendable  features  in  a  physician,  yatient,  medicine  and nurse         ...  ...  ...  ...  ...     303 — 307
CHAPTER  XXXV.
Clinical  Observations  :  — Cliracteristic  features  of  a  long  lived or  short  lived  man,  or  of  one  with  an  average  duration  of  life — Physical  temperaments  and  dimensions  of  the  limbs  and  members of  the  body — Curable,  incurable  or  suppressible  diseases — Sym- pathetic and  Primary  diseases — Different  kinds  of  digestive capacity — Three  stages  of  man — Relative  preponderance  of  Vayu, Pittam  and  Kapham  during  different  stages  of  life — Classification of  countries  according  to  their  physical  features  ...     308 — 328
CHAPTER  XXXVI.
Miscellaneous  remedies  for  swellings  : — Piasters  for  establish- ing suppuration  in  swellings — Plasters  for  bursting,  pressing  out  the pus  from,  or  asepsising  swellings — Aseptic  pastes — Fumigating  com- pounds—Healing pastes — Compounds  which  favour  granulation  in,  or destroy  the  supergrowths  around  an  ulcer      ...  ...     329 — 335
CHAPTER  XXXVn.
Destructive  traits  of  the  different  kinds  of  soil  commended  for the  growth  or  culture  of  medicinal  herbs  : — Examination  of  the soil  from  which  medicinal  drugs  are  to  be  gathered — Examination of  drugs — IMode  of  collecting  drugs — Commendable  traits  in  a  room to  be  used  as  a  drug-store  ...  ...  ...     336 — 341
CHAPTER  XXXVni.
A  General  Classification  o^rdf^?'^-  according  to  tl^eir  therapeu-
umer^^    II  ^    yU'irty  seven  different   groups  of
"?yametc.-Pix)^"«-  -     ^^^-f^^
.ption  of  the  Vel'uoi.  ^  lesh  group
tical   properties; — Enumerh^^jl^.^^  rhirty  seven  different   groups  of medicinal  drugs— Their  US' y^jygj.      Pro^"''  •••  •••     ^^^ — ^^^
X  CONTKNTS.
CHAPTER  XXXIX.
Drugs  possessed  of  cathartic  or  soothing  effects  : — Emetics- Purgatives — Drugs  possessed  of  lirith  emetic  and  purgutive  properties — ^.Errliines — Drugs  whicli  respectively  soothe  the  der  inged  Vayu, Pittaiu  and  Kaphaui — Mode  of  administering  medicines.,.     358 — 363
CHAPTER  XL,
Drugs  and  their  flavours,  virtues,  potencies,  and  chemical actions  : — Disquisitions  as  regards  the  primary  importance  of  drugs, or  their  flavours,  potency',  or  chemical  reaction  in  respect  of curing  diseases — Causes  of  different  kinds  of  digestion — Conclusion as  regards  the  primary  importance  of  drugs  in  curing  a disease     ...  ...  ...       •        ...  ...     364 — 374
CHAPTER  XLI.
Specific  properties  of  drugs  : — Classification  of  drugs  according to  the  preponderance  of  the  virtues  of  elemental  matter  in  them — Characteristic  features  of  drugs  of  dominant  earth  matter,  etc. — Periodicity  of  drug  action — Reasons  why  purgative  drugs  move  the bowels — Factors  which  lead  to  the  aggravation  or  subsidence  of  the deranged  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham— Potency  of  drugs...     375 — 381
CHAPTER  XLII.
Specific  properties  of  flavours  :— Reasons  for  the  classification of  ff a voms— Relation  of  the  elemental  earth  matter  with  the  flavours —Reasons  for  the  primary  derangement  of  Vayu,  Pittam,  etc— Symptoms  and  aggravating  factors  of  the  deranged  Vayu,  Pittam and  Kapham— Virtues  of  the  different  kinds  of  ^iavour,  such  as  sweet, etc.— Enumeration  of  groups  of  ~  *  drugs,  etc.— Sixty-three different  combinations  of  fiavoi^rj?   XXXI  •••  •••     3^2   393
Moae  >..  ,  life  of  a   king  w.>
the  march  j — Tnc  .        ^actors  of   medical  treatuicnt — Good  whw
COMLMS.  XI
CHAPTER  XLIII.
Mode  of  administering  emetics  : — Compounds  of  Madana  fruits Gompounds  of  Jimutaka  ••»  ...  ...     394 — 399
CHAPTER  XLIV. > Choice  of  purgatives  : — Most  efficient  purgatives— Purgative compounds — Purgative  soups — Asavas,  wines,  Sauviras,  and  Tusho- dakas,  etc. — Instructions  as  to  the  way  of  administering  purgative compounds  of  Danti,  etc.,  in  the  manner  of  Trivrit  compounds — Trivrit  Ashtakam — Mode  of  using  purgative  fruits  and  milky exudations  of  trees— Administration  of  purgative  medicines  through the  media  of  wine,  etc.  ...  ...  ...     400—417
CHAPTER  XLV.
Rules  to  be  observed  in  respect  of  liquid  substances  : — Water group — Modes  of  purifying  different  kinds  of  water  and  their  virtues etc. — Milk  group — Virtues  of  the  different  kinds  of  milk — Curd group — Virtues  of  the  different  kinds  of  curd — Takra  group — Modes of  preparing  different  kinds  of  Takra,  and  their  attributes — Properties of  butter,  Kilat,  etc. — Different  kinds  of  Ghritas  (clarified  butter),  and their  properties — Oil  group  and  the  properties  of  different  kinds  of oil— Properties  of  the  fat  obtained  from  aquatic  or  domestic  animals — Honey  group — Classification  of  the  different  kinds  of  honey  and their  properties — Sugar-cane  group,  and  the  properties  of  the  different preparations  of  sugar-cane  juice,  such  as  treacle,  sugar,  etc., — Wine group — Properties  of  the  different  kinds  of  animal  urine...     418 — 468
CHAPTER  XL VI.
Different  kinds  of  for  and  drink  :— Descripti^^ns  of  Sliali Dlianyam,  Shasht''  "Ah  .  udhanyam,  Vaidal,  Mudga,  Sesamum, Barley,  Wheat,  Sp  ,  '  ..nanyametc. — Properties  of  Dlianyas  according to  their  jnatui'ity — Description  of  the  Vei'udha  Dhanyas— Flesh  group
Xll  ■  CONTENTS.
— Classiticutiou  of  tlesh— The  Vishkira  group — General  properties  of the  flesh'  of  Vishkira,  animal^ — Etymology  of  the  term  Pratuda — Enumeration  of  the  animals  of  the  Pratuda  group— Cave  dwelling, and  hole  dwelling  animals— The  Prasalia  group  of  animals — Beneficial use  of  flesh  of  the  Prasaha  group  in, Phthisis — Detailed  classification of  animals  with  the  etymology  of  their  generic  names,  and  proper- ties of  their  flesh — Frvit  group,  and  the  properties  of  different  fruits — Group  of  pot  herbs,  and  their  properties — Flower  groups — The group  o£  edible  leaves  of  plants,  and  their  properties — The  group  of bulbous  plants — The  group  of  salts — General  properties  of  nitrate  of potash,  etc. — Properties  of  gold,  iron,  silver  and  other  metals — Deter- mination of  the  properties  of  drugs  other  than  those  herein  mentioned — Drinks  and  beverages — Rules  of  diet — Rules  of  serving  out  the meal — General  causes  of  indigestion— Symptoms  of  the  different types  of  indigestion — Medical  treatment  of  the  same — Symptoms which  mark  acts  of  over  or  insufticient  eating,  or  an  act  of  eating a  meal  before  a  previous  one  is  digested — Reason  of  one's  feeling hungi'y  even  when  suffering  from  indigestion  ...     469 — 571
^  •
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHUA
SUTRASTHANAM.
CHAP  T  E  R     I.
Well,  we*  shall  now  describe  the  origin  of  the  Science of  Medicine,  as  disclosed  by  the  holy  Dhanvantari  to  his
disciple  Sushruta.    (Vedotpattimadhyaryam).
Once  upon  a  time,  when  the  holy  Dhanvantari,  the greatest  of  the  mighty  celestials,  incarnated  in  the  form of  Divodasa,  the  king  of  Kasi,  was  blissfulh^  seated, in  his  hermitage,  surrounded  bv  a  concourse  of  holy Rishis  ;  Aupadhenava,  Vaitarana,  Aurabhra,  Paush- kalavata,  Karavirya,  Gopura-rakshita,  Sushruta  and others  addressed  him  as  follows  : — "O  Sire,  it  grieves us  much  to  find  men,  though   otherwise  well  befriended
"  The  present  work  which  originally  formed  the  subject  of  a  discourse by  the  holy  sage  Dhanvantari  to  his  disciple  Sushruta,  has  been  compiled in  its  present  form  by  the  venerable  Nagarj una,  and  is  accordingly  designated as  the  Sushruta  Samhila.
2  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.  [  Chap  I.
b)'  the'ir  kin  and  relations,  falling  a  prey  to  diseases, mental,  physical,  traumatic,  or  natural,  and  piteously wailing  in  agony  like  utterly  friendless  creatures  on earth  ;  and  we  supplicate  thee,  O  Lord,  to  illumine  our minds  with  the  truths  of  the  Eternal  Ayurveda (Medical  Science)  so  that  we  may  faithfully  discharge the  duties  allotted  to  us  in  life,  and  alleviate  the sufferings  of  humanit)"  at  large.  Bliss  in  this  life and  hereafter,  is  in  the  gift  of  this  eternal  Ayurveda, and  for  this,  O  Lord,  we  have  made  bold  to  approach thee  as  thy  humble  disciples."  To  them,  thus  replied the  hoi}'  Dhanvantari : — "Welcome  to  all  of  you to  this  blissful  hermitage.  All  of  you  are  worthy of  the  honour  of  true  pupilship  or  tutelage."
The  A'yui'veda  (which  forms  the  subject  of  our present  discourse),  originally  formed  one  of  the  sub- sections of  the  Athar\'a  A'eda  ;  and  even  before  the creation  of  mankind,  the  self-begotten  Brahma  strung it  together  into  a  hundred  thousand  couplets  (Shlokas), divided  into  a  thousand  chapters.  But  then  he thought  of  the  small  duration  of  human  life  on  earth, and  the  failing  character  of  human  memory,  and found  it  prudent  to  divide  the  whole  of  the  Ayurveda into  eight  different  branches  such  as,  the  Salya- Tantram,  the  Salakya-Tantram,  the  Kaya-Chikitsa,  the Bhuta-Vidy.i,  the  KauniHr-Bhrityci,  the  Agada-Tantram, the  Rusa\"ana-Tantram  and   the    \'ajeekarana-Tantram.
Chap.  I.  ]  SUTRASTHAN'AM.  ^
Xow  about  the  characteristi'c  features  of  each  of these  branches  of  the  Science  of  the  Ayurveda  : —
The  Salya-Tantram*— The  scope  of  this branch  of  Medical  Science  is  to  remote  from  an  ulcer) any  extraneous  substanx:e  such  as,  iTagments  of  hay, particles  of  stone,  dust,  iron  or  bone  ;  splinters,  nails, hair,  clotted  blood,  or  condensed  pus  (as  the  case may  be ,  or  to  draw  out  of  the  uterus  a  dead foetus,  or  to  bring  about  safe  parturitions  in  cases  of false  presentation,  and  to  deal  with  the  principle  and mode  of  using  and  handling  surgical  instruments  in general,  and  with  the  application  of  fire  (cautery)  and alkaline  (caustic)  substances,  together  with  the  diagno- sis and  treatment  of  ulcers.
The  Sha'Ia'kya-Tantramt— embraces  as  its
object  the  treatment  of  those  diseases  which  are  restricted to  the  upward  (lit: — region  above  the  clavicles)  fissures  or cavities  of  the  body,  such  as  the  ears,  the  eyes,  the cavity  of  the  mouth,  the  nostrils,  etc.
The    Ka'ya-Chikitsar  (General    diseases! — treats    of    diseases,     which,   instead   of  being     simply
*  Any  foreign  mailer,  lodged  in  a  human  organism  and  proving  painful 10  it,  is  called  a  Shalya.
t  The  name  is  derived  from  the  Sanskrit  term  Slialak^,  a  probe  or  a  rod, the  use  and  application  of  the  instrument  being  primarily  jincluded  within the  scope  of  this  branch  of  the  Ayurveda.
J  The  term  K^ya  literally  signifies  the  vital  heat  or  fire  which  runs through  the  entire  system,  and  hence  the  II5ya-chikits6  deals  with  diseases which  may  gradually  invade  the  root-principles  of  a  living  human  organism.
4  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAATHITA'  [  Cliap.  I.
restricted  to  an}^  specific  organ,  or  to  any  particular part  of  the  body,  affect  the  entire  system,  as  Fever, Dysentery,  Haemoptysis,  Insanity,  Hysteria,  Leprosy, unnatural  discharges  from  the  urethra,  etc.
The  Bhuta-Vidya'  'Demoniacal  diseases) — lays  down  incantations  and  modes  of  exorcising evil  spirits  and  making  offerings  to  the  gods, demons,  Gandharvas,  Yakshas,  Rakshas,  etc.  for cures  of  diseases  originating  from  their  malignant influences.
The  Kauma'ra-Bhritya  Management  of children) — deals  with  the  nursing  and  healthy  bringing up  of  infants,  with  purification  and  bettering  of mothers'  milk,  found  deficient  in  any  of  its characteristic  traits,  and  also  with  cures  for  diseases peculiar  to  infant  life  and  due  to  the  use  of  vitiated mother's  milk  or  to  the  influences  of  malignant  stars and  spirits.
The  Agada-Tantram  ■Toxicology— deals with  bites  from  snakes,  spiders  and  venomous worms,  and  their  characteristic  symptoms  and  antidotes. It  hai  also  for  its  object  the  elimination  of  poison whether  animal,  vegetable,  or  chemical  (resulting  from incompatible  combinations)  from  the  system  of  a  man, overwhelmed  with  its  effects.
The  Rasa'yana-Tantram  Science  of Rejuvenation  , — has     for      its      specific     object      the
Chap.  I.  ]  SUa^RASTHA'NAM.  5
prolongation  of  human  life,  and  tl^e  invigoration  of memory  and  the  vital  organs  of  man.  It  deals  with recipes  which  enable  a  man  to  retain  his  manhood or  youthful  vigour  up  to  a  good  old  age,  and  which generally  serve  to  make  the  human  system  invuhierable to  disease  and  deca}'.
The  Varjcckarana-Tantram  (Science  of Aplarodisiacs, — treats  of  measures  b}'  which  the  semen of  a  man  naturally  scanty  or  deficient  in  quality becomes  shorn  of  its  defects ;  or  is  purified,  if deranged  by  the  ^•itiated  humours  of  the  body  (such  as wind,  etc.  ;  or  is  invigorated  and  increased  in  quantit}' (if  pure  and  healthy) ;  or  acquires  its  health}'  and  normal consistence  '  if  thinned  and  enfeebled  by  indiscretions of  youth\  [In  short,  it  deals  with  things  which  increase the  pleasures  of  youth  and  make  a  man  doubly  endearing to  a  woman].
Thus  the  entire  science  of  the  Ayurveda  is  classified into  the  eight  preceding  branches.  Xow  tell  me,  which of  them  is  to  be  taught  and  to  which  of  you  ?  Said  the disciples  : — "Instruct  us  all,  O  Lord,  in  the  science  of surgery  (  Shalya  )  and  let  that  be  the  chief  subject of  our  study."  To  which  replied  the  holy  Dhan- vantari  : — "Be  it  so."  Then  the  disciples  again said  : — "We  are  all  of  one  mind  in  the  matter, O  Lord,  that  Sushruta  shall  be  our  spokesman  aiid  .ask
6  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'  [  Chap.  I
you  questions  conformably  to  the  general  trend  of  our purpose.  All  of  us  will  attentively  hear  what  you  will be  pleased  to  discourse  to  Sushruta,  [and  that  will  save you  the  trouble  of  teaching  us  individuall)']".  To  which replied  the  venerable  sage — ",Be  it  so.  Now  listen, Sushruta,  m}-  dear  child.  The  object  or  utility  of  the science  which  forms  the  subject  of  our  present  discus- sion, ma}'  be  gi^ouped  under  two  distinct  sub-heads  such as  (i)  the  cure  of  diseased  persons,  and  (2)  the  presetva- tion  of  health  in  those  who  are  not  afflicted  with  any sort  of  bodily  distempers."
The  etymological  meaning  of  the  term  "Ayur- veda" may  be  interpreted  to  denote  either  a  science  in the  knowledge  of  which  life  exists,  or  which  helps  a man  to  enjoy  a  longer  duration  of  life.
The  primary  position  of  surgery:—
[As  regards  time  and  importance  among  the  other  allied branches  of  the  Science  of  Medicine].  Hear  me  discourse on  the  Science  of  Surgery  { Shalya-Tantram)  which  is the  oldest  of  all  the  other  branches  of  the  Science  of Medicme  (Ayurveda)  and  is  fuither  corroborated  by  the four  classes  of  testimonies,  viz.,  Perception,  Inference, Analogv  and  Scriptural  Truths  (Agamas).  The primary  position  of  this  branch  of  the  Ayurveda, (as  regards  its  time  or  origin),  may  be  inferred  from  the fact  that    Surgerv  lends  her  aid  materiallv  towards  the
Chap.  I.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  7
«
healing     up       of     traumatic     mlcers.*      The    'second
reason     for     such     an     intWence     may    be    deduced
from  the  replacement  of  the   severed   head   of  Yajna.
It   is   told   that   the   god    Rudra,  severed   the   head  of
the     God  of  Sacrifice    (Yajna).     Whereupon   the  gods
approached    the     celestial     Ashvins,      and    addressed
them   as    follows  : — "You     twins,    O   lords,    who   are
to   be   the   greatest     of  us   all,   connect  the     head  of
\''aj?ia  with  his   decapitated   trunk."     To  them,   replied
the   divine   Ashvins  : — "  We  shall   do,  O  lords,  as  you
command   us   to   do."    Then  the   celestials  propitiated
the  god  Indra   in  order  that  a   portion  of  the  oblations
offered  in   the   course   of  a  sacrifice,  might  be  allotted
to   those   heavenly  twins.     The  Ashvins   reunited   the
severed   head    of  Yajna  to   his    body   as  prayed   for.
[Hence  this  branch  of  the  Ayurveda  (Shalyanga)  is  the
oldest  of  all  its  subdivisions].
The    primary     importance     of    the
Shalyam  : — All    hold   this     Tantram    to     be     the
most    imnortant    of    all     the    other     branches   of  the Mi^o  See/'  'f    '  "^^^  ^^  suc^w
^^  ^receptacle  ofheauff   iustantaueous   actious   can  be
r/VPQ  '  ^     ^^      ^^^^^^    appliances     as,
^   3  Jb|*/£^getable  world  belongs   t Ve|*Op  ,       T    o^  locomotion,  belong  to
^Jnav  be  areued  here,  since  nd    sword-cuts   had    to    be  dressed   and
^      ^^^     tllQ  to  iuindamental  material    the   gods  and  the   denwns,    long   before
ff  dQ^f]^     'ippearance  Oir)  ],  it  is    not    ct' idiopathic   maladies  such-^  as,  fever,  etc.  ;
ad  Smgery  contruvofold    attril/ was  demanded  of  her  towards  the   healint;
"-•        up  of  those  u'cers.     li>.     But  s' branch  of  the    Ayurveda   is  the  oldest  of  all
IP  the  allied  brawhes  of  thu-se  in.ng  art.
8  THE   SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA  [  Chap.  I.
surgical  operatioi|s,  external  applications  of  alkalis, cauterisation,  etc.,  and  -.secondly  inasmuch  as  it contains  all  that  can  be  found  in  the  other  branches of  the  science  of  medicine  as  well,  with  the  superior advantage  of  producing  instantaneous  effects  by  means of  surgical  instruments  and  appliances.  Hence  it  is the  highest  in  value  of  all  the  medical  Tantras.  It  is eternal  and  a  source  of  infinite  piety,  imparts  fame and  opens  the  gates  of  Heaven  to  its  votavies, prolongs  the  duration  of  human  existence  on  earth, and  helps  men  in  successfully  fulfilling  their  missions, and  earning  a  decent  competence,  in  life.
Gradual  extension  of  the  Ayur- vedic Knowledge  :—Bramha  was  the  first  to inculcate  the  principles  of  the  holy  Ayurveda.  Prajapati learned  the  science  from  him.  The  Ashvins  learned it  from  Prajapati  and  imparted  the  knowledge  to Indra,  who  has  favoured  me  ( Dhanvantari )  with  an entire  knowledge  thereof.  I,  for  the  good  of  mankind, am   ready  to   impart   it   to  those ^;-}-i^antram)-M^i^  earth.
anches  of  the  Sci
The  King  of  Kar?^,ther  corroborate'^^  ac- count Of  himself  i._^  pe,ception,  Inft'^^  '^^ supreme  and  original  god  i^^^^j^^  (Agam?'  *^"^^  ^^ Dhanvantifri.  It  is  I  who  warde  ,  f  tl  disease  and decay  fi-on\  the  celestials,  ^o  -  Kg  j,-,^  was  an  inmate of  the  region  of  heaven,  now  I   a    .  ^  .carnated   on  earth
Chap.  I.]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  9
with  the  view   to   teach    the  Science   of  SurgeiV  with all  its  allied  branches  of  study  to  men.
In  the  present  science  (Ayurveda),  the  Piirusha  (self- conscious  oro:anic  individual)  is  described  as  the  resultant of  the  combination  of  the  soul  and  the  five  primar>- material  principles.  All  medical  acts  such  as,  surgical operations,  administration  of  medicinal  remedies  and applications  of  alkaline  substances,  or  cauterisation, etc.),  are  restricted  to  the  Piirusha  alone.*
Why  is  it  so  ?  The  answer  is,  simply  because  the created  world  is  composed  of  two  distinct  classes, such  as  the  mobile  and  the  immobile. f  These  two classes,  in  their  turn,  are  further  sub-divided  for  the purposes  of  the  science  of  medicine  into  the  two orders,  Agneya  hot  and  Saumya  (cool.  Hence the  world  is  composed  of  fi^'e  material  principles, though  characterised  by  the  twofold  virtues,  Agneya (hot)  and  Saumya  (cool).i
*  It  may  be  questioned  why  they  should  be  confined  to  the  Puiusha  ? Such  a  query  may  be  successfully  met  by  the  statement  that  the  Purusha alone  is  the  receptacle  of  health  and  disease  in  contradistinction  to  the Self  or  Ego.
t  The  vegetable  world  belongs  to  the  latter  category,  while  'animals, possessed  of  locomotion,  belong  to  the  former.
X  It  may  be  argued  here,  since  everything  in  the  universe  is  composed of  the  five  fundamental  material  principles  [  of  earth,  water,  fire  (heat), air  and  sky  (ether)  ],  it  is  not  competent  to  assert  that  the  universe  is possessed  of  the  twofold  attributes  Agneya  (heated  or  fiery)  and  Saumya (cool  or  watery),  alone.  But  since  fire  (heat)  or  water  (cold)  predominates in  all  things  in  the  universe  in  juxtaposition  with  ihe  primary   virtues  of  the
10  THE  SUSWRUTA  SAMHITA.  [Chap.  I.
Further  cliassification  of  the  mobile and  the  immobile  :-  The  animated  world  may be  divided  into  four  subdivisions,  such  as  the  Svedaja (born  of  sweat  or  heat  and  moisture  ?'.  e.  abiogenous' , the  Andaja  (  egg-born  or  oviparous  ),  the  Udbhijja (vegetable)  and  the  Jarayuja  (placental  or  viviparous j. The  Purusha  or  the  subjective  personalit}'  (man)  is  the greatest  of  them  all,  because  all  other  forms  of  life  are made  to  minister  to  his  wants  on  Earth.
Disease  :     Sts   Definition  :— The  Purusha
(man)  is  the  receptacle  of  any  particular  disease,  and  that which  proves  a  source  of  torment  or  pain  to  him,  is  deno- minated as  a  disease.*  There  are  four  different  types of  disease  such  as,  Traumatic  or  of  extraneous  origin (Agantuka),  Bodily  (Sharira),  jNfenla]  (Manasa)  and Natural  (Svabhavika).  A  disease  clue  to  an  extraneous blow  or  hurt  is  called  Agantuka.  Diseases  due  to irregularities  in  food  or  drink,  or  incidental  to  a deranged  state  of  the  blood,  or  of  the  bodily  humours acting  either  singh'  or  in  concert,  are  called  Sharira. Excessive  anger,  grief,  fear,  joy,  despondency,  envy, miser};,    ])ride,    greed,     lust,    desire,     malice,    etc.    are
other  fundamental  material  principles,  it  is  not  improper  to  classify  all under  the  head  of  hot  or  cold,  a  third  factor  being  non-existent.  Hence  the world  (^Trf)  is  possessed  of  the  twofold  virtues,  hot  and  cold.
*  A  disease  may  be  defined  as  something  whicli  affiicts  the  Purusha (self-conscious  personality),  or  those  things  or  incidents  which  combine  to afflict  the  Purusha  are  usually  interpreted  to  connote  that  meaning.
Chap.  I.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 1
included  within  the  category  of^  mental  (Manasa) distempers  ;  whereas  hm7.ger,  thirst,  decrepitude, imbecility,  death,  sleep,  etc.  are  called  the  natural (Svabhavika)  derangements  of  the  body.  The  Mind and  the  Bodv  are  the  seats  of  the  abovesaid  distempers according  as  they  are  restricted  to  either  of  them,  or affect  both  of  them  in  unison.  *
Samshodhanam  (Cleansing),  and  Samshamanam (Pacification  of  the  deranged  or  agitated  bodih'  humours giving  rise  to  the  disease^  and  the  regimen  of  diet  and conduct  are  the  four  fectors  which  should  be  duly emplo3"ed  in  order  to  successfully  cope  with  a  disease.!
Food  is  the  principal  factor  which  materially  contri- butes to  the  strength,  complexion  and  vitality  (Ojah)  of animated  beings.    Food  consists   of  six    different  tastes
*  The  Self  or  Ihe  feevitma  of  a  person  is  above  all  human  concerns  and, as  such,  can  never  be  affected  by  any  disease.
t  Cleansing  (Samshodhanam)  is  of  two  kinds,  viz.  External  and  Internal. External  purification  consists  in  employing  such  measures  as  surgical operations,  cauterisation  of  the  affected  part  or  organ,  external  use  of alkaline  preparations  and  medicated  plasters,  the  internal  one  including such  measures  as  exhibition  of  purgatives  and  emetics,  application  of intestinal  enemas  (Asthapanam)  and  blood-letting.  Diet  comprises  four different  factors  such  as,  food,  drink,  lambative,  etc.,  which,  for  the  purposes of  the  Ayurveda,  are  again  grouped  under  three  different  heads,  such  as the  pacifier  of  the  deranged  bodily  humours  (Dosha-prashamanam),  thera- peutical (VyMhi-prashamanam)  and  health-giving  (Svastha=Vrittikara). Achara  (conduct)  appertains  to  three  different  factors,  such  as  the  body, the  speech,  and  the  mental  acts.  The  abovesaid  measures,  duly  employed, arc  potent  enough  to  combat  all  sorts  of  bodily  distempers,  if  the special  exigencies    of  each    case    arc    carefully  taken  into  consideration.
12  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [Chap.  I.
(Rasa)  '[which  capnot  exist  independently  of  the  subs- tances] in  which  they  are  inherent.  These  substances which  are  called  the  (3shadhis  may  be  di^■ided  into  two classes  such  as  the  mobile  and  the  immobile.  The immobile  Oshadhis  in  their  turn,  admit  of  being  grouped under  four  sub-heads  such  as,  the  ^'"anaspatis,  the Vrikshas.  the  Virudhas  and  the  Oshadhis  proper.
Those  trees  which  bear  fruit  without  blossoming are  called  the  Vanaspatis  such  as,  the  Plaksha  and  the Oudumvura).  Those  that  bear  both  fruits  and  flowers are  called  the  \'rikshas.  Shrubs  and  creepers  that  trail on  the  ground  are  called  Virudhas,  whereas  those  plants which  die  with  the  ripening  of  their  fruits,  are  called Oshadhis  proper   such  as  cereals  .
The  mobile  Oshadhis  or  animals  are  divided  into four  classes  such  as  the  viviparous,  the  oviparous,  the sweat-begotten,  and  those  that  are  born  of  decomposed vegetable  matter.  Man  and  other  mammals  belong  to the  first  group  ;  birds,  snakes,  and  reptiles  belong  to  the second  ;  ants,  worms,  etc.  belong  to  the  third  ;  while  frogs and  Indragopas  belong  to  the  fourth.  For  medicinal  pur- poses, bark,  leaves,  flowers,  fruits,  roots,  bulbs,  the  ex- pressed juice,  and  milky  or  resinous  secretions  of  plants, etc.*    are  .obtained     from    the    vegetable     world.    The
*  The  use  of  oil  expressed  oui  of  diutjs  and    seeds,  as    well    as  of  iheir ashes  or  alkaline  preparations  are  likewise  indicated.
Chap.  I.]  SUTRASTHAWAM.  I-^
skin,    nails,    wool,   blood,    flesh,    fat.,    marrow,    bones, are  procured  from  the  animal  world.
JMetals  and  minerals  such  as  gold,  silver,  gems,  and Manahshila  i  Realgar),  as  well  as  pearls,  clay  and Kapalas  (bones^,  etc.  should  be  included  in  the  list  of the  earthy  substances.  *
Gale,  windfall,  sunshine,  shade,  moonshine,  dark- ness,   heat,    cold,    rain,    day,    night,    fortnight,    month,
» seasons,   and   solstices,   etc.   should   be    deemed  as  the
works  of  eternal  time,  which,  by  virtue  of  their  natural
effects,  contribute  to  the    accumulation,    augmentation,
pacification    or   diminution    of    the     deranged    bodilv
humours  (such  as,  wind,  etc.  .
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — Physicians  should  look  upon  these  four  factors of  ffood,  conduct,  earth  and  time  ,  as  the  accumulators, aggravators  and  pacifiers  of  the  deranged  bodilv  humours and  of  the  diseases  resulting  therefrom  in  man.  Diseases due  to  causes  which  are  extraneous  to  the  bodv  ma\' affect  the  mind  or  the  body.  When  it  would  affect  the body  in  the  shape  of  any  traumatic  disease  (such  as  an inflammation  due  to  a  blow  or  a  sword  cut  >,  it  "should be  treated  medicinally  like  the  rest  of  the  physical  mala- dies, while  the  remedy  should  consist  in  the  enjovmentof
*  Oxide  of  Iron,  sand,  yellow  sulphurale  of  arsenic  (Orpiment),  sail, Gairika  (ferruginous  earth),  Rasdnjana  (antimony)  should  be  regarded  as appertaining  to  the  class  of  earthy  substances.
14  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  hap.  I.
pleasurable  sound?,  touch,  sights,  taste  or  smell  where  the mind  would  be  found  to  be  the  seat  of  the  distemper.
Thus  I  have  briefly  dealt  with  the  Purusha,  Disease, Medicine,  Appliances  and  the  Specific  Time.  The  term Purusha  should  be  interpreted  to  include  within  its meaning  the  combination  of  its  five  material  com- ponents, and  all  things  resulting  therefrom,  such  as  the limbs  and  members  of  the  body,  as  well  as  the  skin, the  flesh,  the  blood,  the  veins  and  the  nerves,  etc. The  term  Disease  signifies  all  distempers  incidental to  the  several  or  combined  actions  of  the  three  deranged bodily  humours  and  blood.  The  term  Medicine  signifies drugs  and  their  virtues,  tastes,  potency,  inherent efficacy  Prabhava  and  reactionary  properties  Vipaka  . Appliances  (kriya  denotes  such  processes  as,  surgical operations,  injections,  emulsive  measures,  lubrications, etc.  The  term  Time  signifies  all  opportune  moments  for medical  appliances.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject :  —The  primary  principle  of  the  Science  of  medicine has  thus  been  briefly  stated  and  will  be  fully  dealt  with in  the'following  one  hundred  and  twenty  chapters  distri- buted among  the  fi-\e  main  sub-divisions  or  Sthanas of  the  present  work.  These  hundred  and  twenty chapters  will  be  found  to  be  elaborately  discussed according  to  the  specific  import  or  significance  of  their denominations   under   the   sub-heads   of  Sutra- Sthanam
Chap.  I.]  SUTRASTHANAM.
15
(Definitive  Aphorisms  or  Fundamental  principles, Nidanam  ^Etiology",  Sharira-Sthanam  (Anatomy  and Physiology  ,  Chikitsa-Sthanam  (Therapeutics)  and Kalpa-Sthanam  (Toxicology  .  Subjects  other  than  the preceding  ones  will  be  discussed  in  the  closing  chapters of  the  book  by  wa}-  of  an  Appendix  (Uttara-Tantranv.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — The  man  who  reads  this  Eternal  Science  of Medicine  ( Ayurveda-Shastram )  discoursed  by  the  self- origined  Brahma  and  propagated  by  the  King  of  Kasi, becomes  noted  for  his  piety,  is  honoured  by  the  kings on  earth,  and  attains  to  the  region  of  Indra  (the  lord of  the  celestials)  after  death.
Thus   ends  the    first    chapter   of  the   Sutra-SthSnam    in     the    Sushrula Samhitd  which  deals  with  the  origin  of  the  Ayurveda.
CHAPTER  II.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  deals with  the   rites   of  formal    initiation  of  a  pupil  into   the
science    of    Medicine     (Shishyopanayaniya- madhya'yam).
Such  an  initiation  should  be  imparted  to  a  student, belonging  to  one  of  the  three  twice-born  castes  such as,  the  Brahmana,  the  Kshatriya,  and  the  Vaishya,  and who  should  be  of  tender  years,  born  of  a  good  family, possessed  of,  a  desire  to  learn_,  strength^  energy  of  action, contentment,  character,  self-control,  a  good  retentive  me- mory, intellect,  courage,  purity  of  mind  and  bod)',  and  a simple  and  clear  comprehension,  command  a  clear  insight into  tlie  things  studied,  and  should  be  found  to  have been  further  graced  with  the  necessary  qualifications  of thin  lips,  thin  teeth  and  thin  tongue,  and  possessed  of  a straight  nose,  large,  honest,  intelligent  eyes,  with  a  benign contour  of  the  mouth,  and  a  contented  frame  of  mind, being  pleasant  in  his  speech  and  dealings,  and  usually painstaking  in  his  efforts.  A  man  possessed  of  contrary attributes  should  not  be  admitted  into  the  sacred precincts  of)  medicine.
lYlode  of  Initiation  :— A  Brahmana  preceptor sliould  initiate  a  disciple  or  student  in  the  following  way — A  square  sand  cushion  or  platform,  measuring  a  cubit
L"hap.   11.  I  SUTkASTHANAM.  j-
f
in  length  and  breadth,  should  be  laid  out  on    a   plot   of smooth,  level    and  sacred'  ground  under   the  benign  in- fluence of  any  auspicious   phase  of  the  moon  or  astral combination  such  as,  the  "Karanam,"  e»tc.  and  in  a  direc- tion of  the  compass  whifch  is  held  most  auspicious  to  that end.    The  cusliion  or   the  jilatform    should  be  plastered over  with  a  solution  of  water  and  cow-dung ;  and  blades  of Kusha  grass  should  be  strewn  over  it.  Then  the  gods,  the Brahmanas  and  the   ph5''sicians  should    be    worshipped with   oblations   of  flowers,  fried  paddy,  gems  and  sun- dried   rice.     Then    having  drawn    straight    lines   across the   Sthandilara   so   as  to  meet  the  top  of  the    furthest side  of  the  square,  and  having  sprinkled  them  over  with holy   water,   the   preceptor  should  lay  down  a  blade  of Kusha  grass  tied  up  in  the  form  of  a  knot,  known  as  the Brahmana,  along  the  side  of  the  sacred  cushion  to  his right,  and  kindle  the  sacred  fire  close  to  his  seat.     Then having  soaked  the  twigs  of  the    four   sacrificial  trees  of Khadira,    Palasha,    Devadaru    and    Vilva,    or   of  Vata, Oudumvara,  Ashvattha  and  Madhuka  in  curd,  honey  and clarified  butter,  he   should  perform    the  rite  of  Homa according  to  the  rules  of  a  Darvi  Homa  ceremony^  Then libations  of  clarified  butter  should  be  cast  into  the  sacrifi- cial fire  with  a  repetition  of  the  Maha  Vyahriti  Mantras preceded  by  the  mystic  Omkara.    After  that,  libations  of clarified  butter  should  be  cast  into  the  fire  in  honour  of each  of  the  gods  and  Rishis  (celestial  physicians)  invoked
3
1 8  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.        1  Chap.  11.
b}^  repeating  the   Svaha  Mantra,  and  the  disciple  should be  made  to  do  the  same.  *
A  Brahmana  preceptor  is  competent  to  initiate  a student  belonging' to  any  of  the  three  twice-born  castes. A  Kshatriya  preceptor  can  initiate  a  student  of  the Kshatriya  or  the  Vaish3'a  caste,  while  a  Vaishya preceptor  can  initiate  a  student  of  his  own  caste alone.  A  Shudra  student  of  good  character  T.nd parentage  may  be  initiated  into  the  mysteries  of  the A5'urveda  by  omitting  the  Mantras  enjoined  to  be recited  on  such  an  occasion.
Then  having  thrice  circumambulated  the  sacrificial fire,  and  having  invoked  the  firegod  to  bear  testimony  to the  fact,  the  preceptor  should  address  the  initiated  dis- ciple as  follows  :— "Thou  shalt  renounce  lust,  anger, greed,  ignorance,  vanity,  egotistic  feelings,  envy,  harsh- ness, niggardliness,  falsehood,  idleness,  ndij  all  acts  that soil  the  good  name  of  a  man.  In  proper  season  thou  shalt pair  thy  nails  and  clip  thy  hair  and  put  on  the  sacred cloth,  dyed  brownish  yellow,  live  the  life  of  a  truthful, self-controlled  anchorite  and  be  obedient  and  respectful towards  thy  preceptor.  In  sleep,  in  rest,  or  while  moving about— while   at    meals    or   in    studv,    and   in    all  acts
"^  The  libations  should  he  oftered  as  follows  -Svah^  (obeisance)  to P,i-ahm4,  Svah.4  to  Praj^pati  (the  lord  of  the  created  beings),  SvahA  to Ashvins,  .Svaha  to  Indra,  Sv.nhA  to  Dhanvantari,  Sv^hA  to  Bharadv^ja, and  SvAh^  to  A'treva.
Chap.  il.  I  SUTRASTHA'NAAl.  19
thou  shalt  be  guided  by  my  directions.  Thcju  shalt do  what  is  pleasant  and  beneficial  to  me,  otherwise thou  shalt  incur  sin  and'  all  thy  study  and  knowledge shall  fail  to  bear  their  wished  for  fruit,  and  thou  shalt gain  no  feme.  If  I,  on  the  other  hand,  treat thee  unjustly  even  w'ith  thy  perfect  obedience  and in  full  conformity  to  the  terms  agreed  upon,  may  I incur  equal  sin  with  thee,  and  may  all  my  know- ledge prove  futile,  and  never  have  any  scope  of  work or  display.  Thou  shalt  help  with  thy  professional skill  and  knowledge,  the  Brahmanas,  thy  elders, preceptors  and  friends,  the  indigent,  the  honest,  the anchorites,  the  helpless  and  those  who  shall  come to  thee  (from  a  distance;,  or  those  who  shall  live  close by,  as  well  as  thy  relations  and  kinsmen  [to  the  best of  thy  knowledge  and  ability],  and  thou  shalt  give  them medicine  [without  charging  for  it  any  remuneration whatever],  and  God  will  bless  thee  for  that.  Thou shalt  not  treat  medicinally  a  professional  hunter,  a fowler,  a  habitual  sinner,  or  him  who  has  been  degrad- ed in  life  ;  and  even  by  so  doing  thou  shalt  acquire friends,  fame,  piety,  wealth  and  all  wished  for  objects in  life  and  thy  knowledge  shall  gain  pubhcity."  ,
Prohibited  periods  of  the  study  of the  Ayurveda  : — The  day  of  the  new  moon,  the eighth  day  of  the  moon's  wane,  the  fourteenth  day  of  the dark  fortnight,   as   well    as   the  corresponding   days  in
20  tHE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.        I  Chap.  II.
the  brio^ht  one,  the  day  oi  the  tlill  moon,  and  the  meet- ings olday  and  night  such  as  (morning  and  evening)  are occasions  when  the  study  of  the  Ayurveda  is  prohibited. Similarly,  a  clap  of  thunder  heard  at  an  improper season  (months  of  Pousha,  Phalguna  and  Chaitra),  or  a Hash  of  lightning  occurring  at  a'  time  when  such  pheno- mena are  naturall)'  rare,  or  an  evil  befalling  one's  country, relations,  or  king,  should  be  deemed  as  occasions jnohibiting  the  study  of  the  Ayurveda.  Moreover, one  should  not  read  it  in  a  cremation  ground,  nor  while riding  (an  elephant,  horse,  or  any)  conveyance,  nor in  a  battle-held,  nor  in  a  place  of  execution.  A  festi- ^  al  or  the  appearance  of  inauspicious  omens,  and  the days  of  the  fortnight  usually  avoided  by  the  Brahmanas in  studying  the  Vedas,  as  well  as  an  unclean  state  of the  body,  should  be  regarded  as  occasions  prohibiting the  studv  of  the  Avurveda.
riuis  lmhIn  llic    sccijiul    clinitlci'    ul    ihc    .SuLiasLhanaiii    in    llit;   SublmiUi. Sanihila  which  Ireals  oflhc  foniuil  inil.i;Ui<jn  of  a  .sUulunl  intM  ihc  Aviiivcda.
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     in.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  chapter  which  deals  with the  classification  of  the  Ayurveda  and  the  order  [in which  the  venerable  Dhanvantari  discoursed  on  them  to his  pupils].    Adhyayana-Samprada'niyam.
It  has  been  stated  before,  that  a  hundred  and  twenty chapters  have  been  distributed  among  the  five  parts or  subdivisions  (of  the  present  work,  in  the  following- order  :— Forty  six  in  the  part  of  Definitive  Aphorisms (Sutra-Sthanam) ;  sixteen  in  the  part  dealing  with  the Etiology  of  diseases  (Nidanam)  ;  ten  in  the  part  explain- ing the  Anatomy  and  physiology  of  the  human  body (Sharira  Sthanam);  forty  in  the  part  of  Therapeutics Ciiikitsitam  ;  and  eight  in  the  part  dealing  with  poisons and  their  antidotes  (Kalpa-Sthauam).  In  addition  to these  the  Uttara-Tantram  consists  of  sixty-six  chapters.
Metrical  texts  :  The  Sutra-Sthanam  which contains  tbrty-six  chapters,  is  so  called  because  it  dis'jusses in  the  form  of  hints,  arranges  in  the  form  of  aphorisms and  connects  by  links  topics  relating  to  longevitv. Chapter  i  Describes  the  origin  of  the  science  of  the Ayurveda.  2  Relates  to  the  formal  initiation  of  a  inipil into    the   science    of    medicine.  '    ;     Deals     with     the
22  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         I  Chap.  III.
classi^cation  and  order  of  the  study  of  the  Ayurveda. 4  Dwells  on  general  interpretations  and  explanations of  subjects  studied,  5  Treats  of  preliminary  preparations for  surgical  operations.  6  Deals  with  seasons  and  their influence  on  health  and  drugs.  7  Treats  of  surgical appliances.  8  Describes  surgi(l:al  instruments.  9  Gives practical  instructions  for  surgical  operations.  10  Dwells on  the  duties  of  medical  men  preliminary  to  their commencing  practice.  1 1  Pharmacy  of  alkalies (potential  cauteries).  12  Cauteries  and  the  rules to  be  observed  in  their  use.  13  Leeches  how and  which  to  use).  14  Blood.  15  Dwells  on the  study  of  development  and  non-development  of  the humorous   constituents    of   the    body    and    excrements,
1 6  The  ceremony  of  piercing  the  lobules  of   the    ears.
17  How  to  distinguish  between  suppurating  and  non- suppurating  swellings.  18  Dressings  and  bandages of  ulcers.  19  The  management  of  patients  with  ulcers, etc.  20  The  salutary  and  non-salutary  effects of  regimen,  etc.  ?.i  The  decisive  modes  in  the treatment  of  sores,  etc.  22  The  opening  of  abscesses, etc.  2S  General  rules  to  be  observed  in  the  treat- ment of  curable  and  incurable  (surgical  diseases. 24  The  nature  of  diseases  in  general.  25  The  (eight different)  ways  of  using  surgical  instruments.  26  The exploration  of  splinters  lost  (deep  seated;  in  the body.  2 J  The  extraction  of  splinters.  28  How to     know    favourable'    and   unfavourable    terminations
Chap.   III.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  o-
in  surgical  diseases.     29  The  favourable  or  unfavourable prognosis    in    diseases     as'   known    from     messengers, omens    and    dreams.     30     Prognosis    from     the    per- version   of  sense   perception.     31     Prognosis   based   on the  altered  condition  of  features,  etc.  32   Prognosis  based on   the   perversion    in  the  external  appearances    of  the body.     33     Palliative   treatment    of  incurable  diseases. 34     The   precautions     to   be   taken     (against    dangers, such     as    poisoning     of    water,     etc.     by   a    medical man   for   the   safety   of    a    king   whose   army     is    on the   march.     35     Clinical    observations   made  b}'  phy- sicians.    ^6     Miscellaneous     subjects     connected    with the      treatment     of    injuries    and     surgical      diseases. ^y     The    examination     of  the  soil    for    the     selection of  vegetable   products   growing    on    it   to  be   used   as medicines.     38     Classification    of    drugs    according   to their     therapeutical     uses.;     39     The  two     classes     of drugs   which  cleanse   the   system  [by   evacuating    bad humours]  and  drugs  which  pacify  the  irritated  humours.
40  Drugs,     their   flavours,    properties     and    maturity.
41  The     properties     of    drugs     specially     considered.
42  Flavours.  43  The  choice  of  emetics.  44  The choice  of  purgatives.  45  Liquids.  46  Food  and drink.
From  their  investigatmg  the  (pathological)  causes and  symptoms  of  diseases,  they  'are  called  Nidananij (etiology)  and  are  sixteen  in  number.
24
»
THP:  SUSHRL'IA  SAiMHlTA.         [Chap.  III.
Chapter  i  Causes  and  S5''niptoms  of  diseases  caused  b}' wind.  2  Hoemorrhoids.  3  Urinaiy  calculi  4  Fistulas. 5  Skin  diseases  Kushtha),  6  Urethral  discharges. 7  .Abdominal  tiVmours  and  dropsy.  8  Abortion  and unnatural  labours.  g  Abscesses.  10  ErN'sipelas  and Carbuncles.  1 1  Tumours  12  Scrotal  tumours.  13  Fractures 'and  disl(>."ations)  14  Diseases  of  the  male  organ  of generation  caused  by  Shuka.  15  Minor  .and  _  mis- cellaneous diseases.     16  Diseases  of  the  mouth.
The  great  sage  has  devoted  ten  chapters  to  the subject  of  Anatomy  and  Physiology  (Sharira-Sthanam) for  medical  men  and  contemplative  saints  to  learn  the component  parts  of  the  human  body.    They  are  :  —
Chapter  i  Cosmology.  2  Healthy  and  un- healthy) condition  of  male  and  female  germs.  3 Development  of  the  foetus.  4  Analytical  descrip- tion of  the  fetus.  5  Component  parts  of  the  body.  6 Investigation  of  each  vital  part.  7  Description  of  the veins.  8  \'enesection.  g  Arteries.  10  Pregnancy (child-birth  and  management  of  womt.-n  in  child-birtli and  of  children).
The  division  of  Therapeutics,  (Chikitsitam)  includes (amongst  others;  the  modes  of  treating  diseases  by medicines,  expiatory  ceremonies,  propitiatory  rites,  and tranquillizing  efforts.  Torty  chapters  have  been  devoted to  this  division.  Chapter  i    'Prcatment  of  two  varieties
Chap.   III.  J  SUTRASTHANAM.  25
of  ulcers.  2  Treatment  of  instant  wounds  and  ulcers resulting  therefrom,  3  Fractures  and  dislocations.  4 Diseases  of  wind.  5  Grievous  maladies  caused  by  wind. 6  Haemorrhoids.  7  Urinary  calculi.  8  Fistulas.  9 Skin  diseases.     10  Grievous   skin  diseases.     11  Urethral
9
discharges.  12  Warts,  pustules  and  sores  caused  by urethral  discharges,  13  Diabetes.  14  Abdominal  Dropsy. 15  Abortions  and  unnatural  hibours.  16  Ab- scesses. 17  Erysipelas  and  Carbuncles.  18  Tumours. 19  Scrotal  tumours  and  Syphilis.  20  Minor  diseases. 21  Diseases  of  the  male  genital  organ  caused  bv Shuka.  22  Diseases  of  the  mouth.  2^  Swellings. 24  Prophylactic  treatment  against  diseases  in  general. 2=)  Miscellaneous  diseases.  26  Tonics  for  virile  debility. 27  Tonics  for  general  debility.  2S  Remedies  for  increasing mental  powers  and  duration  of  life.  2g  Remedies  for innate  maladies.  30  Means  for  removing  wordly  distresses. 31  Treatment  of  diseases  where  oleaginous  substances are  useful.  ^^2  Treatment  by  diaphoretics.  33  Emetics and  Purgatives.  J4  Treatment  for  mishaps  from  the injudicious  use  of  emetics  and  purgatives.  35  Nozzles and  pipes,  and  enema  apparatus.  ^6  Mishaps  from injudicious  use  of  enemas.  37  Enemas  and  injections. ^S  Clysters.  39  Treatment  of  complications  in  general. 40  Inhalation,  fumigations,  gargarismata,  etc.
From  their  proposing  remedies  against  poisons,  they are  called  Kalpas,  and  are  eight  in  number. 4
46  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.        I  Chap.  ill.
ChUpter  I  Preservation  of  food.  2  A'egetable  and inorganic  poisons.  3  Poisons  from  organic  creation. 4  Snake  poison.  5  Treatment  of  snake-bites.  6  Rat- bite  and  its  treatment.  7  Emitting  the  sound  ol kettle-drums  (for  the  eh'mination  of  poison).  8  Antidotes for  and  treatment  of  venomous  insect-stings.
Thus  a  synopsis  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  chapters has  been  given.  Now  here  follows  the  supplementary division  called  after  its  own  name  (Uttara-Tantram).
The  Chapter  on  Sympathetic  diseases  is  placed  first, as  this  division  has  for  its  main  object  the  description of  such  diseases  and  their  treatment.  2  Diseases  of  the joinings  (margin  of  the  eyelids)  of  the  eyeball.  3  Dis- eases of  the  eyelids.  4  The  Sclerotic  of  the  eye.  5  The Cornea.  6.  The  eyeball,  as  a  whole.  7  Diseases  of  the pupil.  8  Treatment  of  eye  diseases.  9  Prophylac- tic and  curative  treatment  of  wind  affections  of  the  eye and  ophthalmia.  10  Treatment  of  Bile  affections  of  the eye  and  ophthalmia.  1 1  Treatment  of  Phlegm  affec- tions of  the  eye  and  ophthalmia.  1 2  Treatment  of  Blood affections  of  the  eye.  13  Treatment  of  aftections  in which  scarification  is  needed.  14  Treatment  in  which paracentesis  is  needed.  15  Treatment  by  incisions. 16  Entropium  and  ectropium.  17  Treatment  of  the diseases  of  the  pupil  and  vision.  18  General  rules regarding  ophthalmic  medicine  and  surgery.  19  Treat- ment of  traumatic  affections  of  the  eyeballs.    20  General
Chap.   III.  I  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
27
signs  and  s3nnptoins  of  ear  diseases.  2 1  Treatment ol  ear  diseases.  22  Signs  and  S3'mptoms  of  nose affections.  2},  Treatment  of  nose  affections.  34  Treat- ment of  nasal  catarrli.  25  Signs  ai^d  sj'mptoms  of cranial  diseases.  26  Ti;eatment  of  cranial  affections. These  (twenty-six  ciiapters)  form  the  end  of  the eight  divisions  of  the  A^'urveda,  called  Shilikyam.
Chapter  2-]  Signs  of  diseases  caused  by  the  Nava- grahas.  28  Prophylactic  treatment  of  diseases  caused by  Skandha.  29  Treatment  of  convulsions  caused  by Skandha.  30  Treatment  of  Sakuni  affections.  31  Treat- ment of  Revati  affections.  },2  Treatment  of  Putana. 33  Treatment  of  Andha  Putana.  34  Treatment  of Slueta-Putana.  35  Treatment  of  Mukhamandika. 36  Treatment  of  Naigamesha.  i"]  Origin  of  the  nine Grahas.  38  Diseases  of  the  Vagina  (and  internal  female genital  organs).  These  twelve  chapters  together  Vvith what  is  included  in  (the  last  chapter  of  the  division  on ; anatomy,  form  the  fifth  division  of  the  A5'urveda) called  Kaumara  Tantram.
Chapter  39  Fevers  and  their  treatment.  40 Enteric  Catarrh  and  its  treatment.  41  Consumption  and its  treatment.  42  Diseases  of  the  abdominal  glands  and their  treatment.  43  Diseases  of  the  heart  'Angina Pectoris  etc.  44  Anaemia  and  allied  diseases  and their  treatment.  45  HfCmorrhag^c  affections  and  their treatment.      46  Apoplectic  diseases  and  their  treatment.
2-8  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.         1  Chap.  ill.
47  Diseases  from  excessive  drinking  and  their  treatment.
48  Symptoms,  causes,  and  treatment  of  excessive  thirst.  49 Causes,  S5'mptoms  and  treatment  of  vomiting.  50  Causes, s5^mptoms  and  treatment  of  Hiccough.  5 1  Causes,  symp- toms, and  treatment  of  Dyspnoea.  52  Causes,  symp- toms and  treatment  of  cough.  53  Aphonia.  54 Entozoa.  55  Causes,  symptoms  and  treatment  of retention  of  excrements.  56  Causes,  symptoms  and treatment  of  Dyspeptic  and  Choleric  diarrhoea.'  57 Anorexia  and  its  treatment.  58  Causes,  symptoms and  treatment  of  cystic  and  urethral  affections.  59 Causes  and  treatment  of  urine  diseases.  These  twenty one  chapters  describe  the  remaining  diseases  of Kayachikitsa  ;  (which  forms  the  third  division  of  the Ayurveda  \
Chapter  60  Causes,  symptoms  and  treatment  of diseases  caused  by  superhuman  powers.  61  Causes svmptoms  and  treatment  of  Epilepsy.  62  Mania. These  three  chapters  form  the  Bhuta  Vidya  (the  fourth division  of  the  Ayurveda).
Chapter  63  on  the  different  varieties  of  flavour. 64  (leneral  rules  for  the  preservation  of  health.  65 Deductions  and  inunctions  drawn  from  tbe  texts  and study  of  the  Ayurveda.  66  On  the  varieties  of  mor- bid elements  (h^^mours;.  These  four  chapters  are to  be  understood  as  being  supplementary,  and  as  orna- ments to  this  division.
Chap.   III.  j  SUTRASTHANAM.  20
This  last  division  from  its  superiority  over  the others,  the  great  sages  have  called  the  Excellent (Uttarani).  From  the  information  it  gives  on  varied subjects,  it  is  called  the  best,  the  permanent  and  ihe last.
In  this  division  which  is  called  the  last,  there  are included  four  divisions  (of  the  Ayiirveda)  viz,  Shalakyam, (treatment  of  diseases  of  parts  situated  above  the clavicles),  2  Kaumarabhrit^'am  (management  of  children), 3  Kayachikitsa    general  diseases)    and  4     Bliuta-Vidya.
The  division  (named)  Vajeekaranam  (on  the  strength- ening of  virile  power,  etc.)  and  Rasayanam  remedies preserving  vigor,  etc.)  have  been  included  in  the (fourth )  division  (of  this  treatise   called  Chikitsa.
The  doctrine  of  antidotes  comes  under  the  head  of Kalpa  of  this  treatise  and  Shah'am  surgery  is  incident- ally treated  throughout  the  book.  Thus  these  are  the eight  limbs  divisions,  of  tne  Science  of  Medicine proclaimed  to  the  world  by  the  original  god.  Those, who  stU'ly  them  with  due  care  and  make  use  of  the knowledge  with  caution,  shall  preserve  the  li\'es  of men  on  this  earth.  It  is  imperatively  necessary  that the  book  should  be  read  ;  and  after  having  read  it  one should  attend  to  the  practice  (of  the  science  .  The physician  who  has  learnt  these  both,  is  lit  to  be  honour- ed by  kings,
30  THE  SUSHKUTA  SAiMHlTA.         f  Chap.  III.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject :— A  ph^'sician,  well  versed  in  the  principles  of the  science  of  medicine  (Ayurveda),  but  unskilful  in  his art  through  want  of  practice,  loses  his  wit  at  the bedside  of  his  patient,  just  as,  a  coward  is  at  his wit's  end  to  determine  what  to  do  when  for  the first  time  he  finds  himself  in  the  ranks  of  a  contending army.  On  the  other  hand  a  physician,  experienced  in his  art  l)ut  deficient  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Ayurveda, is  condemned  by  all  good  men  as  a  quack,  and deserves  capital  punishment  at  the  hands  of  the king.  Both  these  classes  of  ph3^sicians  are  not  to  be trusted,  because  th}-  are  inexpert  and  half  educated. Such  men  are  incapable  of  discharging  the  duties  of their  vocation,  just  as  a  one-winged  bird  is  incapable  of taking  flight  in  the  air.  Even  a  panacea  or  a  medicine  of ambrosial  virtues  administered  b)'  an  unpractised  or  ig- norant ph)^sician,  will  prove  j^ositively  baneful  as  a draught  of  poison,  or  a  blow  with  a  weapon,  or  a  thunder- bolt. A  physician,  ignorant  of  the  science  and  art  of  sur- gery and  emollient  measures  Sneha-karma  ,  etc.  is  but a  killer  of  men  out  of  cupidity,  and  who  is  allowed  to carry  on  his  nefarious  trade  only  through  the  in- advertence of  the  king.  A  physician  well  --ersed  in  the principles  of  surger}-,  and  experienced  in  the  prac- tice of  medicine,  is  alone  caj^able  of  curing  distempers, just  as  only  a  two- wheeled  cart  can  be  of  service  in  a field  of  battle.
Chap.   III.  SUTRASTHANAM.
31
Now  hear  me,  O  child,  describe  the  mode  of  st'adying the  present  science  of  the  Ayurveda.)  The  pupil  having worshipped  and  recited  his  daily  prayers  should calmly  sit  near  his  preceptor,  pure  in  body  and mind,  who  should  teach  him  a  full  i^hloka  or  couplet of  the  Ayurveda),  or  a  half  or  a  quarter  part  thereof, adapted  to  his  intellectual  capacity.  Then  he  should make  a  full  and  elaborate  paraphrase  of  the recited  couplet  or  any  piwi  thereof,  and  ask  his  pupils individually  to  do  the  same.  When  the  pupils  have paraphrased  the  same  to  the  satisfaction  of  the  precep- tor, he  should  again  recite  the  same  stanza  or  couplet. The  passages  or  shlokas  should  not  be  recited  too hastily,  nor  drawled  out  in  a  timid  or  faltering  voice,  nor with  a  nasal  intonation.  The  voice  should  be  neither  too loud,  nor  too  weak,  but  each  sound  should  be  clearly and  distinctly  uttered,  and  the  lips,  the  eyes,  the  eye- brows, and  the  hands,  etc.  should  not  be  lifted  or  moved to  keep  time  with  the  recitation.  Xo  one  should  be allowed  to  pass  between  the  pupil  and  the  preceptor at  the  time  of  study.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject  : — A  pupil  who  is  pure,  obedient  to  his preceptor,  applies  himself  steadily  to  his  work,  and abandons  laziness  and  excessive  sleep,  will  arrive  at  the end  of  the  science  (he  has  been  studying  .
.\  student  or  a  pupil,  having  'finished   tire   course  ol.
32
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        L  Chap.  III.
his  studies,  would  do  well  to  attend  to  the  cultivation  ol" fine  speech  and  constant  practice  in  the  art  he  has learnt,  and  make  unremitting  efforts  towards  the attainment  of  perfection  (in  the  art).
Thus    ends    the    ihird    Chapter    uf   the    Siilraslhanani    in    the  Sushrul.i Sanihila  wliich  deals  with  the  Classification  of  tlie  Ayurveda.
CHAPTER    IV.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  deals with  General  Explanations  (Prabha'Saniya- madhyaryam).
The  endeavours  of  a  man  who  has  studied  the  entire Ayurveda  (shastra)  but  fails  to  make  a  clear  exposition of  the  same,  are  vain  like  the  efforts  of  an  ass  that carries  a  load  of  sandal  wood  (without  ever  being able  to  enjoy  its  pleasing  scent).
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — A  foolish  person  who  has  gone  through  a  large number  of  books  without  gaining  any  real  insight  into the  knowledge  propounded  therein,  is  like  an  ass  laden with  logs  of  sandal-wood,  that  labours  under  the  weight which  it  carries  without  being  able  to  appreciate  its virtue.
Hence  the  preceptor  will  clearly  explain  each  shioka or  a  half  or  a  quarter  part  thereof  as  contained  in the  present  work,  divided  into  a  hundred  and  twenty chapters  (as  well  as  in  the  concluding  portion  of  the Uttara-Tantram  appended  to  it)  ;  and  the  student  or the  disciple  shall  attentively  hear  everything  explained or  discoursed  on  by  the  preceptor.  Since  it  is  extremely difficult  to  classify  drugs,  ta^te,  virtue  (Guna), potency   (Virya),   transform  at ory   or  reactionary  effect
34  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  IV.
(Vipaka),  fundamental  bodily  principles  i  Dhatu)  bodily excrement  (Mala),  hollow  viscera  ( Ashaya),  vital  parts cMarma\  veins  (Sira),  nerves  (Snayu),  joints  (Sandhi), bones  (Asthi;  and  the  fecundating  principles  of  semen and  ovum,  and  to  extricate  any  foreign  matter  lodged  in an  ulcer),  or  to  ascertain  the  nature  and  position  of ulcers  or  fractures,  or  the  palliative,  curable  or  incur- able nature  of  a  disease,  etc.  ;  and  since  these  subjects perplex  even  the  profoundest  intellects  though  a thousand  times  discussed  and  pondered  over,  not  to speak  of  men  of  comparatively  smaller  intellectual capacity,  hence  it  is  imperatively  obligatory  on  a  pupil or  a  disciple  to  attentively  hear  the  exposition  of  each shloka^  or  a  half  or  a  quarter  part  thereof,  made  by  the preceptor  (while  studying  the  science  of  medicine).
For  explanations  of  truths  and  principles  quoted from  other  branches  of  (science  or  philosophy)  and incidentally  discussed  in  the  present  work,  the  student is  referred  to  expositions  made  by  the  masters  fof  those sciences  or  philosophies;,  since  it  is  impossible  to  deal with  all  branches  of  science,  etc.  in  a  single  book  (and within  so  short  a  compassX
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject: — By  the  study  of  a  single  Shastra,  a  man  can never  catch  the  true  import  of  this  ( Science  of  Medicine). Therefore  a  physician  should  study  as  many  allied branches  of  (science  or  philosophy)    as   possible.    The
Chap.  IV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
35
physician  who  studies  the  Science  of  Medicine  from  the h"ps  of  his  preceptor,  and  practises  medicine  after  having acquired  experience  in  his  art  by  constant  practice,  is the  true  physician,  while  any  other  map  dabbling  in  tne art,  should  be  looked  upon  as  an  impostor.
The  Shalya-Tantras  (surgical  works)  written  or propagated  by  Aupadhenava,  Aurabhra,  Sushruta  and Paushkalavata,  are  the  bases  of  the  works  or  Tantras written  by  others  {^Karavirya,  Gopura-rakshita,  etc,  i.
Thus  ends   the   fourth    chapter  of   the   Sutrasthanam   in   the  Sushruta Samhit^  which  deals  with  General  Explanations.
CHAPTER    V.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of Preliminary  measures  in  connection  with  the  curative remedies  of  a  disease).*  (Agropaharaniyam- adhyaryam).
The  entire  course  of  medical  treatment  in  connec- tion with  a  disease  ma)?'  be  grouped  under  Ihree subheads,  as  the  Preliminary  measures  (Purva-karma)  ; the  Principal  therapeutical  or  surgical  appliances (Pradhana-karma'>  ;  and  the  After-measures  (Paschat- karma).  These  measures  will  be  discussed  under  the head  of  each  disease  as  we  shall  have  occasion  to deal   with   them.     As  the   present   treatise   principall)'-
*  Several  authorities  hold  that  acts  such  as  fasting,  administration of  purgatives,  etc.  should  be  included  within  the  preliminary  measures  ; application  of  absorbent  (Pachana)  or  healing  medicinal  agents,  within  the second  or  the  principal  measures  ;  and  the  administration  of  tonics  or restoratives  within  the  third  or  the  after-measure  group.  Others,  on  the contrary,  lay  down  that  measures  adopted  for  the  absorption,  lubrication (pacification  by  the  application  of  oily  substances)  or  elimination  of  the deranged  bodily  humours  Ijy  sweating  should  be  grouped  under the  first  subhead  ( Purva-karma),  the  administration  of  active  purgatives, emeticsr  etc.,  under  the  second  (Pradhana-karma)  and  the  giving  of  rice meal,  etc.  to  the  patient  under  the  (Paschat-karma)  last  ;  while  according to  others  the  active  medicinal  agents  employed  to  cope  with  the  deranged humours  in  the  incubative  stage  of  a  bodily  disease  till  the  appearance  of  its first  characteristic  symptoms,  should  be  denominated  as  the  Preliminary measure  ;  measures  employed  for  the  subjugation  of  a  disease  in  its  patent  or fully  developed  stage  as  the  Pradhana-karma,  and  measures  employed  to guard  against  the  recrudescence  of  a  disease  and  for  the  restoration  of health  in  a    patient  is  the  sequel  treatment  or  the  Pasch^t-karma.
Chap.^  V.  1  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  -^7
treats  of  surgical  acts  or  operations,  we  shall   discourse on  them  and  their  accessories  at  the  outset.
Surgical  acts  or  operations  are  divided  into  eight different  kinds  such  as  Incising  (Chhedya),  Excising (Bhedya),  Scraping  (Lekhj^as  Puncturing  (Vedhya), Searching  or  probing  (Eshya),  Extracting  (Abarj'-a), Secreting  fluids  (Visravya)  and  Suturing  (Seevya).  A surgeon  (Vaidya)  called  upon  to  perform  any  (of  the  eight preceding  kinds)  of  operations,  must  first  equip  himself with  such  accessories  as  surgical  appliances  and  instru- ments, alkali,  fire,  probe  or  director  (Shalaka),  horns, leeches,  gourd  (Alavu),  Jamvavoushtha  (a  kind  of  pencil shaped  rod  made  of  slate  with  its  top-end  cut  into  the shape  of  a  Jamboline  fruit),  cotton,  lint,  thread,  leaves, tow(Patta),  honey,  clarified  butter,  lard,  milk,  oil, Tarpanara  (powdered  wheat  soaked  in  water),  decoc- tions Kashaya  ,  medicated  plasters,  paste  (Kalka),  fan, cold  water,  hot  water,  and  cauldrons,  etc.,  and  moreover he  shall  secure  the  services  of  devoted  and  strong- nerved  attendants.
Then  under  the  auspices  of  blissful  astral  coi-Qbina- tions,  etc.,  and  having  propitiated  the  Brahmanas  and the  physicians,  with  gifts  of  curd,  sun-dried  rice,  cordials and  gems,  etc.,  and  having  made  offerings  to  the  gods and  uttered  benediction,  etc.,  the  surgeon  should commence  his  work.  The  pa'dent  should  be  given light    food    (before  the  act),    and    made    to   sit   with
38  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHTTA'.  [  Chap.  V.
his  face  turned  towards  the  east.  His  limbs  should  be carefully  fastened  (so  as  to  guard  against  their  least movement  during  the  continuance  of  the  operation). Then  the  surgeon,  sitting  with  his  face  towards  the west,  and  carefulh'  avoiding  the  vital  parts  (Marmas), Veins,  nerves  (Snayus),  joints,  bones  and  arteries  of  the patient,should  insert  the  knife  into  the  affected  part  along tlie  proper  direction  till  the  suppurated  part  would be  reached  and  swiftly  draw  it  out.  In  case  of  extended suppuration,  the  part  opened  (length  of  incision)  should be  made  to  measure  two  or  three  finger's  widths  in length.  An  incision  (Vrana)  which  is  wide,  extended, equally  and  evenly  divided,  should  be  deemed  the  best.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — An  incision  which  is  wide,  extended,  well divided,  does  not  involve  any  vital  part,  etc.  of  the patient,  and  is  well-matured  as  regards  time,  is  the best  of  its  kind*.  Courage,  light  handedness,  non-shak- ing, non-sweating,  sharp  instruments,  self  confidence and  self  command  are  what  should  be  possessed  by a  surgeon  engaged  in  opening  a  boil  or  an  abscess.
Two  or  three  incisions  should  be  made  if  a  single opening  does  not  seem  large  enough  for  the  purpose.
*  Certain  commentators  interpret  the  couplet  as  follows  :  A  boil or  an  abscess  which  is  wide,  extended,  well  defined  in  its  shape,  equally suppurated  in  all  its  parts  and  does  not  involve  any  vital  part  of  the  body is  the  fittest  thing  for  a  surgeon's  knife — Tr.
Chap,  v.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  39
Authoritative  verse  on  the  'sub- ject : — The  knife  (lancet)  should  be  freely  used wherever  a  fissure,  sinus,  or  a  cavity  would  appear in  a  boil,  so  as  to  ensure  a  complete  flowing  out  of the  pus  accumulated  in  it.
Lateral  (tirjak)  incisions  should  be  made  in  regions of  the  eye-brows,  temple,  forehead,  cheeks,  eyelids,  lower lip,  gums,  armpits,  loins,  belly  and  the  groins.
An  incision  made  in  the  region  of  the  hand  or  root should  be  made  to  resemble  the  disc  of  the  moon,  while those  about  the  anus  and  the  penis  should  be  made semi-circular  !  half-moon  j  in  shape.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject :  —An  incision  in  any  of  the  abovesaid  regions  not made  as  directed,  may  give  rise  to  extreme  pain,  pro- longed granulation  (healing)  and  condylomatous  growths in  and  about  the  ulcer,  owing  to  an  inadvertent  cutting of  the  local  veins,  or  nerves.  In  a  case  of  artificial or  instrumental  parturition,  in  ascites,  in  piles,  in stone  in  the  bladder,  in  fistula  in  ano,  and  in  diseases affecting  the  cavity  of  the  mouth,  the  patient  operated on  should  be  kept  on  an  empty  stomach  (before  thS^act).
Then  sprays  of  cold  water  should  be  dashed  over the  face  and  the  eyes  of  the  patient  to  relieve  the  pain and  the  sense  of  exhaustion  incidental  to  the  operation. The  sides  of  the  incision  should  be  firmly  pressed  fso  as to  ensure  a  good  outflow  of  the  accumulated  pus)  and
40  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [Chap.  V.
the  margins  of  the  wound  should  be  rubbed  with the  fingers  (so  that  they  may  have  a  level  surface and  be  of  uniform  structure  throughout.)  Then  the wound  should  be  washed  with  an  astringent  decoction (of  Nimba,  Triphala,  etc.)  which  should  be  wiped  and made  thoroughly  dry  with  a  piece  of  clean  linen.  Then a  lint  plug  'Varti)  plastered  over  with  the  (paste)  Kalka of  sesamum,  hone)'  and  clarified  butter,  and  soaked  in disinfectant  (lit  : — purifying  medicines  such  as Ajagandha,  etc.  i  should  be  inserted  deep  into  the  cavity of  the  wound.  After  that,  a  poultice  made  of  offi- cinal substances  should  be  applied  over  it  and  the whole  should  be  bound  up  with  thick  layers  of  tow (Kavalikas— such  as  the  leaves  and  bark  of  the  Indian figtree  etc.)  which  are  neither  too  irritant  nor  too cooling  in  their  effect  ;  and  finally  scraps  of  clean  linen should  be  wound  round  them.  The  limb,  [or  the  affected part]  should  be  subsequently  fumigated  with  the  fumes of  pain-killing  (anodyne)  substances  and  also  with those  of  drugs  which  are  supposed  to  ward  off  all malignant  spirits  (from  the  bedside  of  the  patient.)*
Then  it  should  be  fumigated  with  the  drugs,  known as  Guggulu,  Vacha,  white  mustard,  Saindhava and  the  leaves  of  the  Ximva  tree,  soaked  in  clarified butter.      The   residue   of  the   clarified   butter   [dripped
*  Even  the  bedsheels,  etc.  of  the  patient  should  be  fumigated  as  above. This  foreshadows  the  germ  theory  of  the  modern  days— Tr.
Chap.  V.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  41
down  and  collected  from  the  fumigating  corftpound described  above],  should  be  rubbed  over  the region  of  the  heart  and  other  vital  parts  of  the  patient, and  the  floor  of  the  chamber  should  be  washed  and sprinkled  over  with  drops  of  water  previousl)^  kept  in a  (new)  pitcher  for  the  purpose.  The  rites  of  protection from  the  influences  of  baneful  spirits,  should  then  be performed  by  reciting  the  Mantra  which  runs  as follows  : — "I  am  about  to  practise  the  prophylactic  incan- tation for  guarding  thy  person  against  the  malignant influences  of  Rakshas  and  conjured  demonesses,  and may  the  god  Brahma  be  graciously  pleased  to  approve of  its  performance.  May  the  Gods  and  deities  and  mini- sters of  grace  disperse  and  confound  the  hosts  of wrathful  Nagas  (celestial  serpents),  Pishachas,  Gandhar- vas  and  Pitris  that  might  be  maliciously  disposed to  strike  thee  in  thy  sickly  confinement.  May  the  spirits, which  stir  abroad  in  the  night  and  roam  about  in  the sky  and  on  earth,  defend  thy  person  in  recognition  of thy  fervent  devotion  to  them.  May  the  concourse  of Brahma-begotten  sages  'such  as,  Sanaka,  etc.),  the  saintly and  canonised  kings  (Rajarshis)  in  heaven  and  the  sacred mounts,  streams  and  oceans  of  the  earth  protect  thee from  evil.  May  the  fire-god  guard  thy  tongue  ;  the wind-god  protect  thy  breath  ;  and  the  Moon-god, Parjanya,  Vidyut  lightning)  and  the  spirit  of  the  clouds preserve  the  healthy  coursings  of»  those  vital  winds  in th}'  organism  which  are  respectively  known  as  Vy^na, 6
42  THE  SUSHRUTA    SAMHITA  [  Chap,  v
Apana;  Udana  and  Samana.  May  Indra,  the  presiding deity  of  all  physical  energies,  keep  thy  bodily  strength immaculate.  May  Manu  defend  the  two  side  tendons at  the  nape  of  thy  neck,  as  well  as  thy  facult)^  of intellect  ;  the  Gandharvas,  thy  faculty  of  desire  ; Indra,  thy  fortitude  ;  Varuna,  thy  faculty  of  cogni- tion ;  the  Ocean,  thy  region  of  umbilicus  ;  the  Sun- god,  thy  eyes  ;  the  Quarters  of  the  Heaven,  thy  ears  ; the  Moon-god,  thy  mind  ;  the  Stars,  thy  complexion  ; the  Night,  thy  shadow  ;  the  Water,  thy  vigour  ;  the Oshadhis,  thy  hair  ;  Infinite  Ether,  the  space  which is  imprisoned  in  thy  body  ;  \\isundhara,  thy  body  ; Vaishvanara,  thy  head  ;  Vishnu,  thy  moral  courage  ; Purushottama  (the  foremost  of  beings),  thy  energy  of action  (dynamical  action  of  purposes);  Brahma,  thy  self; and  Dhruva  (immutable  being),  thv  eyebrows.  May these  divinities,  which  perpetually  reside  in  thy  body, ensure  thy  safe  continuance  in  being  and  may  thou enjoy  a  long  life  through  their  grace.  May  the  gods such  as,  Brahma,  etc.,  confer  blessings  on  thy  head. May  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  the  twin  sages  Narada  and Parvata,  the  fire-god,  the  wind,  and  the  other  celestial helpmates  of  Indra,  bring  thee  good.  May  the  pro- phylaxis devised  by  Brahma  keep  thee  from  evil.  Mav thou  be  spared  to  witness  the  return  of  many  a  long and  happy  year  on  earth.  May  such  abnormal  physi- cal phenomena  as,  droyght,  deluge,  excessive  downpour of    rain,    and    excessive     germination     (or    wholesale
Chap,  v.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  .,
43
extinction  of  such  vermin  as)  rats,  mosquitoes,  flies which  invariably  portend  evil  and  mortality  in  a community,  as  well  as  bloody  feuds  among  kings, abate  and  cease.  May  thou  be  relieved  of  all  pain  and misery.  We  close  the  prayer  with  a  "Svaha"  (obeisance\ The  present  Vedic  mantra  exercises  an  occult  power in  relieving  ailments  which  are  due  to  the  malignant influences  of  conjured  up  she-devils.  May  thou  acquire  a long  life  through  the  protective  energy  of  the  pro- phylactic prayer  (lit :— incantation;  now  read  by  me.
Then  having  protected  the  body  of  the  patient  with the  recitation  of  the  above  Vedic  Mantra,  the  surgeon shall  see  his  patient  taken  to  his  own  chamber,  and prescribe  the  proper  course  of  medicine  and  diet  accord- ing to  the  exigencies  of  each  case.  The  old  bandage should  be  loosened  on  the  third  day  of  the  operation, when  the  wound  or  the  ulcer  should  be  washed,  and a  fresh  bandage  should  be  wound  round  as  before.  The bandage  should  not  be  loosened  on  the  day  following the  lancing  of  a  boil,  as  such  a  measure  might  give rise  to  a  sort  of  excruciating  pain  and  formation  of  knots in  the  wound  and  retard  the  process  of  granulation (healing).  On  the  third  day,  the  surgeon  (Vaidya)  should prescribe  the  proper  medicated  plaster,  diet,  etc.  after fully  considering  the  strength  of  the  patient,  the  nature of  the  disease,  and  the  then  prevailing  season  of  the  year. A  wound  should  not  be  tried  to  be  healed  up,  as  long  as
44
THE   SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA         [  Chap.  V.
the  least  morbid  matter,  or  pus  remains  in  its  inside,  as it  would  lead  to  the  formation  of  fresh  cavities  in  the surrounding  health}^  tissues,  and  ultimately  to  a recrudescence  of  the  disease.
The  authoritative  verses  on  the subject  : — Accordingly  a  wound  or  an  ulcer  should be  made  to  heal  up  after  the  perfect  purification  of  both of  its  inside  and  exterior  has  been  fully  brought about.  Even  after  the  healing  of  the  wound  the patient  should  studiously  avoid  all  sexual  connections, indigestive  viands,  fatiguing  physical  exercises  and indulgence  in  emotions  of  grief  or  fright,  or  in  ecstasies of  joy,  until  the  cicatrix  has  acquired  enough  toughness. The  dressings  and  bandages  should  be  untied  and changed  ever}'  third  day  in  winter,  in  spring  and  in  the season  of  Hemanta,  and  on  each  alternate  day  in  summer and  in  the  rains.  But  a  physician  (surgeon)  should not  be  guided  by  these  rules  in  cases  where  there  would be  reasons  to  apprehend  imminent  danger,  and  in  such cases  the  wound  or  the  ulcer,  like  a  house  in  flames, should  be  checked  as  speedily  as  possible.
Clarified  butter  boiled  with  Yashtimadhu,  and applied  tepid  to  a  wound,  incidental  to  a  surgical operation,  is  sure  to  alleviate  the  excruciating  pain  that is  usually  experienced  in  such  an  affected  part.
Thus  ends  llie  fifih  chapter,  of  the  Sutiasthanani  in  ihc  SushnUa  Sanihita which  treats  of  Preliminarv  nieasiues.
CHAPTER    VI.
Xow  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of the  characteristic  features  of  the  differetit  seasons  of  the year  and  their  influence  on  health  and  drugs fRitucharya'dhya'yam).
The  Eternal  Time  is  without  origin,  middle,  or  end, self-l/egotten,  and  the  lord  of  all  attributes.  Contrariety or  non  contrariety  of  the  natural  attributes  of  drugs  or substances  endued  with  characteristic  tastes,  such as  sweet,  etc.,  are  brought  about  by  time  ;  and  time is  the  principal  factor  that  controls  the  births  or  deaths of  beings.
Etymology  of  the  term  Ka'Ia  (t^me):  — The  Kala  or  the  Eternal  time  is  so  called  from  the fact  of  its  not  suffering  even  one  of  its  own  minutest particles  or  subdivisions  (Kala)  to  perish,  though perpetually  moving,  and  in  constant  motion  in  itself ;  or it  derives  its  epithet  from  the.  fundamental  quality  of its  destroying  all  beings  and  laying  their  dead  remains  in heaps  in  succession.  Some  assert  that  the  name  is  due to  the  fact  that  time  blends  ( kalanam )  all  beings  with misery  or  happiness  according  to  their  respective  acts, or  to  its  leading  all  beings  to  destruction  ( kala).
The  Sun-god,  by  his  peculiar  motions,  divides eternal  time  which  is  measured  by  years  ( Samvatsaras)
I
46  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  VI.
into  'increasingly  progressive  but  smaller  subdivisions) such  as,  Nimeshas  (lit : — time  taken  in  closing  the  eyelids^, Kashthas^  Kalas,  Muhurtas,  days  and  nights,  fortnights, months,  seasons,  solstices,  years  and  Yugas.
Time  taken  in  articulating  any  of  the  short  vowels (such  as  A.  etc.),  is  called  an  Akshi-Nimesha.  Fifteen Akshi-Nimeshas  make  one  Kashtha.  Thirty  Kashthas make  one  Muhurta.  Thirty  Muhurtas  make  one  day and  night.  Fifteen  days  and  nights  make  one  fort- night. A  fortnight  is  either  dark  or  bright.  Two  fort- nights make  one  month.  The  twelve  months  such  as, Magha,  etc.  are  divided  into  six  seasons  such  as.  Winter, Spring,  Summer,  Rains,  Autumn  and  Hemanta,  each consisting  of  two  months.
The  two  months  known  as  Tapas  and  Tapasva (Magha  and  Phalgunai  constitute  the  season  of  winter. Spring  consists  of  two  months  called  Madhu  and Madhava  (Chaitra  and  Vaishaka  .  Summer  is  marked  by two  months  known  as  Shuchi  and  Shukra  Jaistha  and Ashadha '.  The  rains  or  the  rainy  season  is  marked  by two  months  called  Nabhas  and  Xabhasya  (Shravana  and Bh^dra\  The  two  months  known  as  Isha  and  Urja (Ashvina  and  Kartika)  constitute  what  is  called  the season  of  Autumn.  Hemanta  is  marked  by  two  months called  Sahas  and  Sahasya  '  Agraha5^ana  and  Pousha). These  six  seasons  are  respectiveh^  characterised  by  cold, heat,  rains,  etc.
Chap.  VI.  1  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
47
The  two  Ayanams  are  ushered  in  by  the  sun  afid  the moon  changing  their  respective  courses  in  the  heavens (passing  over  the  tropics  of  Cancer  and  Capricorn)  as  the measurers  of  time.  The  rains,  autumn  and  Hemanta follow  one  another  in  succession  when  the  sun  is over  the  Tropic  of  Capricorn  or  is  in  the  Winter Solstice  (Dakshinayanami  and  the  moon  gains  in strength  in  this  part  of  the  year.  Rasas  (Serum  or sap)  possessed  of  acid,  saline  and  sweet  tastes,  grow strong  and  become  dominant  when  the  sun  is  over the  Tropic  of  Capricorn  ^Dakshinayanam)  and  all  beings gain  in  strength  and  energy  more  and  more.  Winter, spring  and  summer  mark  the  passing  of  the  sun  over the  Summer  Solstice  '  Uttarayanam  .  The  sun  grows stronger  in  heat  and  light,  and  saps  rasas  i  of  bitter,  pun- gent and  sour  tastes  increase  in  intensity,  and  all  animals gradually  begin  to  lose  strength  and  energy.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject :— The  moon  imparts  the  moisture  and  humi- dity to  the  earth  which  is  soaked  up  by  the  sun  in his  daily  course,  while  the  wind  in  conjunction with  the  sun  and  the  moon,  contributes  towards  the preservation  of  animal  life.  The  successive  change  of the  two  solstices  marks  a  year.
Five  such  complete  years  count  as  a  Yuga.  The  sub- divisions of  eternal  time  from  the- minutest  Ximesha  to a  complete  Yuga,  are  constantly  revolving  like  a  wheel_,
48  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  VI.
and  this  constant  or  perpetual  revolution  is  called  the wheel  or  C5Tle  of  time  ^,Kala-Chakra  1  by  certain authorities.
The  six  seasons  such  as,  the  Rains,  etc.,  have  been again  adverted  to  in  this  chapter  for  the  purpose  of  fully describing  the  accumulation,  excitation  aggravation)  and pacification  of  the  bodily  humours,  such  as  wind,  etc. According  to  some,  the  rainy  season  consists  of  two months  known  as  Bhadra  and  Ashvina  ;  Autumn  consists of  the  two  months  of  Kartika  and  Margashirshya  ;  He- manta  consists  of  the  two  months  of  Poushaand  Magha  ; spring  consists  of  the  two  months  of  Phalguna  and Chaitra ;  summer,  of  Vaishakha  and  Jaistha  ;  and  Pr^^Tit, of  Ashadha  and  Shravana.
Oshadhis  '  Medical  plants  and  cereals  sprout during  the  rains  and  are  enfeebled  in  their  properties. Water  becomes  muddy  or  turbid  and  the  earth  is covered  over  with  fresh  deposits  of  washed  off  or  silted mud.  The  sky  becomes  overcast  with  clouds,  and the  wind,  charged  with  an  excess  of  humidity,  dulls the  appetite  and  organisms  of  beings.  Hence  the food  of  beings  which  principally  consists  of  tender and  new-grown  vegetables  of  feeble  potency,  consider- ably vitiated  by  the  turbid  water  partaken  of  as  drink during  the  season,  proves  acid  in  its  digestive  reaction, and  germinates  exce-ssive  bile  in  the  human  system. In  autumn  the  skv  becomes  cloudless,  the  mire  is  dried
Chap.  VI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  ^g
up,  and  the  bile  originated  and  accumulated  during  the rains,  is  liquefied  by  the  ,  rays  of  the  sun  and  gives rise  to  bilious  diseases*
Plants  and  vegetables  (Oshadhis)  tlmt  grow  or  sprout during  the  rainy  season,  are  matured  in  course  of  time and  ripen  in  their  virtues  and  potency  in  the  season  of Hemanta.  The  water  becomes  clear,  cool  and  heavy in  this  season.  The  sun's  rays  become  feeble  and  mild  ; and  the  winds  moistened  with  frost  and  snow,  make the  human  system  a  little  numb  and  heavy.  Hence water  and  vegetables  partaken  of  in  Hemanta  are divested  of  their  properties  of  acid  reaction  after  being assimilated  in  the  human  system,  but  they  give  rise to  an  accumulation  of  phlegm  in  the  body  owing  to their  heaviness,  sliminess,  and  cooling  and  oily  character. In  spring,  the  phlegm  thus  accumulated  in  the  body  is hquefied  and  ushers  in  diseases  due  to  a  deranged  state of  that  bodily  humour,  t
The  said  plants  and  vegetables,  in  their  turn,  lose their  sap,  moisture  and  nutritive  element  in  summer, and  become  dry  and  extremely  light.  In  the  same manner  water  becomes  drought-making  [produces  a state  of  parchedness  in  the  organism — Ruksha]  in  its virtue,,  and  considerably  loses  its    natural   coolness   and
*   This  should  be  regarded  as  the  excited,  aggravated    or  agitated   state of  bile  (Pitta)  in  the  parlance  of  Ayurveda.
i    This  is  called  the  excited  or  agitated  state  of  phlegm  (Kafa).
50  thp:  sushruta  samhita.      [  chap.  vi.
nutritive  properties.  The  sun's  rays  dry  up  the  natural moisture  of  the  human  system,  and  accordingly  water and  vegetables  largely  partaken  of  in  summer,  give  rise to  an  accumulation  of  wind  in  the  system  owing  to  their lightness,  dryness,  or  expansive  and  drought-making properties.  Subsequently  wind  thus  accumulated  in  the summer,  is  agitated  by  the  rains  and  cold  winds  in  the '^Cr^V^rt  of  the  rainy  season  (V^^vrii)  when  the  ground  is flooded  witii  water  and  thus  gives  rise  to  diseases  \v^hich are  incidental  to  a  deranged  state  of  the  bodily  wind.*
The  fundamental  bodily  humours  such  as,  wind, bile,  etc.  augmented  and  accumulated  during  the  rains, Hemanta  and  summer,  should  be  checked  as  soon as  they  become  aggravated  (manifest  themselves)  in autumn,  spring,  or  in  the  forepart  of  the  rainy  season (Pravrit;.
Diseases  which  owe  their  origin  to  a  deranged  state of  bile,  phlegm  and  wind,  are  respectivel}'-  amelio- rated in  Hemanta,  summer,  and  autumn  by  natural causes,  [such  as  the  variations  of  atmospheric  or  earthly temperature,  rainfall,  etc.].  Thus  far  we  have  discussed the  accumulation,  excitation  and  pacification  or alleviation  of  the  deranged  bodily  humours.
Likewise  the  features,  which  specifically  mark the     different   seasons   of    the   year   are   observed    to
*  This  is  called  the  excited  state  of  wind  (Vayu).
Chap.  VI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^  i
• characterise  the  different  parts  of  a  complete   day  and
night,  [or  in  other  words]  .traits   peculiar  to  spring  time
exhibit  themselves  in  the  morning  ;   the  noon  is  marked
by  all  the  characteristics  of  summer  r,  the  evening  by
those  of  the  rainy   season  ;  the  midnight  by  those   of
autumn  ;   and  the   hours    before    dawn   by  those  of
Ilpmiinta      And  similarly,  like  the  seasons  of  the  year,
the  diffeieftypkiLs'of  the  day  and  night  arc   -/x«.rked  b"^
variations  of  heat,   cold,   etc.  [or  in   other  words]  the
deranged  bodily  humours   such   as    wind,    bile,    etc.
naturally  and  spontaneously  accumulate,  aggravate,  or
subside  during  the  different  parts  of  the  day  as  they  do
in   the  different  seasons  of  the   year   [represented  by
those  parts  of  the  day  and  night  as  stated  above].
Water  and  vegetables  retain  their  natural  properties when  the  seasons  are  natural,  and  do  not  exhibit  con- trary features,  and  they  then  tend  to  increase  the appetite,  vitality,  strength,  and  power  of  the  human system.  Contrary  or  unnatural  seasons  are  but  the consequences  of  sin  committed  by  a  whole  community and  portend  the  workings  of  a  malign  destiny. A  season,  exhibiting  unnatural  or  contrary  features, affects  or  reverses  the  natural  properties  of  water  and vegetables  peculiar  to  it,  which,  drunk  or  partaken  of, cause  dreadful  epidemics  in  the  country.  The  best  safe- guard lies  in  not  using  such  defiled  water  and  vegetables when  an  epidemic  breaks  out  in  the  country.
52  THESUSHRUTA  SAMHITA,         [  Chap.  vi.
Sometimes  a  town  or  a  city  is  depopulated  by  a curse,  anger,  sin,  or  by  a  monster  or  a  demoness  conjured up  by  a  spell  or  incantation.  Sometimes  the  pollens  of poisonous  flowers  or  grasses,  etc.,  wafted  by  the winds,  invade  a  town  or  a  village,  and  produce  a sort  of  epidemic  cough,  asthma,  catarrh,  or fever,  irrespective  of  all  constitutional  n^^nii-vit^^c kDr'^dei'Un^::!  bodily  humours  agitateS'l^/Lkll^^,  fTowns and  villages  are  known  to  have  been  depopulated through  malignant  astral  influences,  or  through houses^  wives*,  beds,  seats,  carriages,  riding  animals, gems  and  precious  stones  assuming  inauspicious  features.
Prophylactic  measures:— In  such  cases migration  to  a  healthy  or  unaffected  locality,  perfor- mances of  rites  of  pacification  and  atonement,  (wearing of  prophylactic  gems  and  drugs),  recitations  of  mantras, libations  of  clarified  butter  cast  into  the  sacrificial  fire, offerings  to  the  gods,  celebration  of  sacrificial  cere- monies, obeisance  with  clasped  palms  to  the  gods, practice  of  penances,  sell-control  and  charity,  kindness, spiritual  initiation;  obedience  to  one's  elders  and preceptors,  and  devotion  to  the  gods  and  the  Bramhanas, and  observance  of  such  like  rules  of  conduct  may  prove beneficial  to  the  affected  community.
*  Marriages  with  girls  of  prohibited  description  have  been  known as  well  to  have  ushered  in  an  epidemic  which  devastated  a  whole  town  or a  country.
Chap.  VI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  53
The  characteristic  features  of  the seasons  Avhich  c|o  not  exhibit  un- natural traits  (Metrical  texts)  -Cold winds  from  the  north  blow  in  the  season  of Hemanta.  The  quarters  of  the  sky  are  enveloped  in smoke  and  assume  a  dusky  aspect.  The  sun  is  hid in  the  frost,  and  lakes  and  pools  are  frozen  or  lie covered  over  with  flakes,  or  thin  layers  of  ice. Cro\^'s,  rhinoceroses,  buffaloes,  lambs  and  elephants become  excited  and  sprightly  in  this  part  of  the  year  ; and  the  Lodhra,  Priyangu,  and  Punnaga  trees  begin  to blossom.
Winter  exhibits  the  same  features  as  above,  only in  a  greater  degree  of  intensity  ;  and  the  quarters  of the  sky  are  agitated  by  strong  gales  of  wind  and showers  of  rain.
In  spring,  when  the  summits  of  the  mount  Malaya are  besmeared  red  with  the  moist  foot-prints  of  the brides  of  the  Siddhas  and  the  Vidyadharas,  and  are perfumed  in  contact  with  the  sweet-scented  sandal forests,  the  lively  south- wind  is  roused  up  from  his  lair and  winnows  gladness  to  damsels  burning  with  desires, and  kindles  up  the  flame  of  love  and  appeases  the amorous  anger  of  the  beloved  pairs  by  turning  their fancies  to  themes  of  love.  The  quarters  of  the  sky  are cleared  up  and  look  joyful.  The  woods  are  decked with   the   full-blown   flowers   of   the   Kinshuka,   lotus,
54  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [Chap.  VI.
Vakula,  mango  and  Ashoka  trees.  The  bee  hums  and the  notes  of  the  Cuckoo  are  heard  to  reverberate through  the  skies.  The  south  wind  fans  this  king  of the  seasons,  and  the  forests  are  hung  with  the  festoons of  tender  and  sprouting  leaves  in  his  honour.
The  sun's  rays  become  stronger  and  more  intense  in summer.  Unhealthy  winds  blow  from  the  south-east. The  earth  is  heated  ;  the  rivers  run  narrow  and  shallow in  their  beds  ;  the  quarters  of  the  sky  glare  with  a blazing  light,  the  birds  Chakravakas  with  their  mates roam  about  in  quest  of  cool  ponds  and  reservoirs  of water  ;  herds  of  deer  are  tormented  and  overwhelmed with  thirst  ;  trees,  plants  and  creepers  are  scorched  by the  intense  heat,  and  withered  leaves  drop  off  from the  trees  which  alone  serve  to  make  the  identification of  their  parents  possible.
In  the  forepart  of  the  rainy  season  (Pravrit',  packs of  detached  clouds,  spangled  with  lightning  and  driven before  the  gales  of  the  west-wind,  come  thundering  over and  envelop  the  skies.  The  Earth  is  robed  in  green with  luxurious  growth  of  corn,  enlivened  here  and there  by  the  dark  crimson  of  the  cochineal  insects (Indragopa),  and  Kadamva,  Nipa,  Kutaja,  and  the Ketaki  trees  begin  to  flower.
During  the  rainy  season,  the  rivers  overflow  their banks,  tumbling  down  the  trees  which  grow  on  them. Ponds  and  lakes  are  decked  with  the  full-blown  Kumud
Chap.  VI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
55
and  Nilotpala  flowers.  The  earth  is  covered  with  firofuse vegetation.  All  distinction  between  dry  lands  and resers^oirs  of  water  becomes  impossible,  and  the  sun and  the  planets  are  enveloped  in  dark  clouds  that shower  torrents  of  rain  but  do  not  roar.
In  autumn  the  sun's  rays  assume  a  mellow  golden tint.  Masses  of  white  clouds  are  seen  to  sail  the  dark  deep blue  of  heaven.  Ponds  are  decked  with  the  full  blown lotus  flowers,  agitated  by  the  wings  of  the  diving swans  The  high  grounds  become  dry,  while  the  low- lands still  retain  their  muddy  character.  The  level plains  are  covered  with  shrubs  and  undergrowths, and  plants  and  trees  such  as,  Vana,  Saptahva, Vandhuka,  Kasha  and  Asana,  flower  in  abundance.
The  bodily  humours  such  as  wind,  etc.  aie  disturbed and  aggravated  by  the  contrariety,  excess  or  vari- ations in  the  characteristic  features  of  the  seasons. Hence  it  is  prudent  to  check  the  deranged  phlegm in  spring,  to  conquer  the  deranged  bile  in  autumn,  and to  subdue  the  deranged  bodily  wind  in  the  rains,  before they  develop  themselves  in  any  patent  or  manifest bodily  ailment.
Thus  ends  the  sixth  chapter  of  the  Sutrasthanam  in  the  Sushruta Sanihit^  which  treats  of  the  characteristic  features  of  the  seasons  and  their influence  on  health  and  drugs.
C  H  A  P  T  E  R     V  I  I .
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of Surgical  Appliances,  their  Uses  and  Construction. (Yantra-VicJhimadhya'yam).
Surgical  instruments  number  one  hundred  and  one  * in  all,  of  which  the  hand  is  the  most  important,  inas- much as  (all  of  them  depend  on  the  hand  for  •  their principal  auxiliary)  and  as  none  of  them  can  be handled  without  it  ;  and  further  because  all  sur- gical operations  pre-eminentlj^  require  its  co-operation. Any  foreign  or  extraneous  substance,  which  finds  a lodgment  in  the  Inunan  system  and  becomes  painful  to the  body  and  the  mind  alike,  is  called  a  Shalyam  ;  and surgical  instruments  are  the  means  of  extracting  it (from  its  seat  or  place  where  it  is  embedded \
(Surgical  Appliances  may  be  divided  into  six  different groups  or  types,  such  as  the  Svastika,  the  Sandansha, the  Tala,  the  Nadi  Yantras,  and  the  Shalakas,  besides those  that  are  called  the  minor  or  accessory  appliances (Upa^yantras).
The  Svastika  instruments  (forceps)  in  their  turn,  are divided  into  twenty-four  sub-classes  ;  the  Sandansha instruments     (tongsi   into    two  ;    the    Tala    Yantras
*  According  to  certain  authorities  hundred  is  here   indefinitely  used   for a  large  number.
Chap.  VII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  5-
• into  two  ;  the   Nadi  Yantras    tubular)   into  twent)^  ;
and  the  Shalakas  (bougies;  into  twenty-eight  ;  while the  Upa-yantras  admit  of  being  divided  into  twenty- five  different  types.  These  instrumeijts  are  all  made of  iron  which  ma}"  be  substituted  for  any  other similar  or  suitable  substance  where  iron  would  be unavailable.
The  mouths  of  these  appliances  are  usuall}'  made  to resemble  those  of  birds  and  beasts,  and  hence  they  should be  made  to  resemble  the  mouths  of  some  particular animal  in  shape,  or  otherwise,  according  to  the  advice of  old  and  experienced  ph3"sicians  -  surgeons;,  or  accord- ing to  the  directions  as  laid  down  in  the  Shastras (Medical  books  of  recognised  authority,  or  according to  the  exigencies  of  the  case,  or  after  the  shape  and structure  of  other  appliances  used  on  similar  occasions.
Metrical  texts:  — Appliances  should  be  made neither  too  large  nor  too  small,  and  their  mouths or  edges  should  be  made  sharp  and  keen.  They should  be  made  with  a  special  eye  as  to  strength and  steadiness,  and  they  should  be  provided  with convenient  handles.
Appliances  of  the  Svastika  class  should  be  made to  measure  eighteen  fingers  in  length  ;  and  their mouths  should  be  made  to  resemble  those  of  lions, tigers,  wolves,  hyenas,  bears,  cats,  jackals,  deer, Erv^rukas    ;a    species    of    deer,    crows,    cormorants,
58
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.       [  Chap.  Vll.
Kururas  la  species  of  birdi,  Hasas  (a  species  of  sparrow vultures,  falcons,  owls,  kites,  herons,  Bhringarajas (a  species  of  bird ,  Anjalikamas,  Avabhanjanas, Nandimukhas,  and  such  like  beasts  and  birds.  The two  blades  or  halves  of  a  Svastika  should  be  welded together  b}-  means  of  a  bolt  resembling  a  Masura pulse  1  lentil;  in  size,  and  the  handles  should  be  turned inward  in  the  shape  of  a  mace,  or  an  Ankusha.  Apph- ances  of  this  type  should  be  used  in  extracting an}'  thorn  or  foreign  matter  which  may  have  entered into  the  bones.
Sandanshas  tongs  are  divided  into  two  classes  as thev  are  soldered  together  with  or  without  a  bolt. They  should  he  made  to  measure  sixteen  fingers  in length,  and  should  be  used  to  withdraw  any  thorn- like substance  from  below  the  skin,  tlesh_,  veins  or nerves.
The  Tala  Yautras  which  measure  twelve  fingers in  length,  mav  be  divided  into  two  classes  as  the siiigle  Tala  and  the  double  Tala.  The  former resemble  the  scales  of  fish  in  shape,  while  the  latter, according  to  certain  authorities,  are  made  to  resemble the  entire  mouth  of  a  fish  of  the  Bhetuli  species.  These Yantras  are  used  in  extracting  splinters  from  inside the  nose,  ears  and  other  external  channels  or  passages ot  the  body.
The  Nadi  Yantras  tubular  instruments  like  syringe,s
Chap.  VII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^o
enemas,  etc,  with  a  passage  or  aperture  running through  their  entire  .length^  are  constructed  in a  variet}'  of  shapes  and  for  various  purposes. Some  of  them  are  open  at  one  end,  while  others are  open  at  both.  These  instruments  are  used  for  the purpose  of  extracting  any  shalyam  that  has  pricked into  the  external  canals  or  passages  of  the  body,  or  for inspecting  the  seat  of  affection  as  in  piles,  etc.,  or  for sucking  (blood,  etc.  from  any  affected  part ,  or  simply  as accessories  to  other  surgical  appliances.  The  length  and circumference  of  a  Nadi  Yantra  should  be  made  to commensurate  with  those  of  the  passage  'Srota'i  or  outlet of  the  human  system  into  which  it  is  intended  to  be introduced.  We  shall  describe,  later  on,  the  types  of Nadi  Yantras  which  are  to  be  used  in  connection with  such  diseases  as  fistula  in  ano,  piles,  etc.  or in  tumours  and  ulcers,  in  Mutradvriddhi  (Hydrocele) in  Niruddha  Prakasha  (  Phimosis  ),  in  Niruddha Guda  'Stricture  of  the  rectum)  and  in  ascites, as  well  as  those  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  of injecting  anything  into  the  urethra,  the  bowels,  the vagina  and  the  uterus,  or  are  used  in  connection  with medicated  inhalation,  or  with  those  that  are  known as  the  Alavu  Yantras  (gourd  used  for  cupping).
The  Shalaka- Yantras  bougies  are  of  various shapes  and  serve  a  variety  of  purposes.  The  lengths and  girths  of  these   instruments   should  be  determined
6o  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       :  Chap.  vil.
according   to   the     necessity    of    each   individual  case. Four    probes   or   directors    shalaka    in  two   pairs,   are used   for    the     purposes     of    searching      Eshana     pus in  a  suppurated     part   or   limb,   or  in   connection    with uplifting,   cutting   and   thereby  withdrawing  a  shalyam from  the  part   it    has   pricked   into,  or   with  a  view  to transfer   such    a    body    from     one   place    to    another Chalanam ,     or    for     the     purpose     of    extracting    it i  Shalyam   from  the  affected  part.     The  mouths    of  the two  types  of  these  directors  respectively  resemble  those of  a    Gandupada    earthworm     and  of  a   Sharapunkha Tephrosia   Purpurea,    Pers    while   the    other   two   are respectively  headed  like  the  hood   of  a   serpent  and   a fish  hook.     A  couple  of  directors  are  used  for  the  pur- pose   of    withdrawing    a    foreign     matter     'Shalyam; imbedded  in  any  outer  canal  of  the  body  (Srotas ).      The top-ends  of  these  directors  are  bent  down   a  little,  and they  resemble  a  lentil  seed  in  size.   Six  types  of  directors or  probes  are  used  in  cleansing  the  pus  from  an  affected part  of  the  human  organism ;  and  their  top-ends  are  fitted with  caps  of  loose  cotton.     The  three  sorts  of  directors used  in   applying   alkaline  medicines,    are   shaped   like ladles,  and  their  mouths  resemble  the   cavities   of  little stone  mortars  (Khala.)    Of  the  six  sorts  of  directors  used in  connection   with  the  process  of    cauterisation   (Agni- Karma)  three   are    mouthed   like  the  Jamboline  fruit, while  the  other  three  are  faced  like  a  mace    or   a    spear (^Ankusha. .     A  kind  of  director  used  in  removing   nasal
Chap.  VII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  6l
tumours,  is  mouthed  like  the  half  of  the  kernel  'found in  the  inside  of  a  Jujube-stpne,  with  a  little  dip  in  the middle,  its  lip  or  end  having  a  keen  or  sharp  edge. The  ends  of  the  type  of  probe  used  in  applying Anjanams  medicated  collyria  to  the  eyelids  are wrought  into  two  small  round  lobes  like  the  Matara pulse  and  are  blunted,  while  the  sort  of  probe used  in  cleansing  the  urethra,  is  made  round  like  the  end of  tht;  stem  of  a  Mdlati  flower.
The  Upa-yantras  or  minor  surgical accessories — include  such  substances  as  rope, the  Venika  (braided  hair;,  silk  thread,  the  bark  and  the inner-skin  of  trees,  creepers,  linen,  Ashthila  'stones  , large oval  shaped  pebbles,  a  hammer,  the  palms  of  the  hands, the  soles  of  feet,  fingers^  tongue,  the  teeth,  the  nails,  hair, the  mane  of  horses,  branches  of  trees,  a  magnet,  alkali, fire,  and  medicine,  and  such  acts  as  spitting,  straining (kunthanam;,  exhilaration  and  intimidation.
IVIetrical  texts  : —These  accessories  should  be applied  to  the  entire  body  of  a  patient,  or  to  any  part thereof  such  as,  the  arteries,  the  ^'iscera,  or  the  joints, according  to  the  necessities  of  each  case  to  be determined  by  the  surgeon.
The  Functions  of  Surgical  Instru- ments : — are  striking  out  Nirghatanam-lit  : — with- drawing a  Shalyam  by  moving  it  to  and  fro), mjection   or   filling,    binding,    up-lifting,     cutting     and
62  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  vii.
thereby  withdrawing  a  Shalyam,  resetting  by  means of  a  twirling  motion,  removing  of  a  Shalyam  from one  place  to  another,  twisting,  expanding,  pressing, purifying  of  a  passage,  drawing  off,  attracting,  bringing to  the  surface,  uplifting,  lowering  down,  applying pressure  all  round  a  part,  or  an  organ,  agitating,  sucking, searching,  cutting  or  cleaving,  straightening,  washing  or flushing,  stuffing  the  nose  and  cleansing.  They  number twenty-four  in  all.
IVIctrical  texts  :— The  intelligent  surgeon  shall exercise  his  judgment  and  determine  the  nature  of  the surgical  operation  required  in  each  individual  case,  for surely  the  shalj^as  requiring  a  surgeon's  aid  are  infinitely varied  in  their  character.
An  appliance  A^antraUvhich  is  too  thick,  or. made  of inferior  metal  and  hence)  not  substantially  made,  or  too short  or  too  long,  or  does  not  admit  of  being  easily handled  and  is  incapable  of  taking  in  the  entire Shalyam,  or  is  curved,  loosely  fitted,  or  soft-bolted,  or loosely  tied  up  with  cords,  'should  not  be  used  in surgical  operations).  These  are  the  twelve  defects  of  a surgical  instrument.
Metrical  texts  : — The   use   of  an    instrument
devoid  of  the  abovesaid  defects  and  measuring  eighteen
fingers  in  length,  is  commended   in  surgical   operations,
Shalyas   which   are   manifest   and   visible  to  the  naked
eye,  should  be   extracted   with  the  instruments   of  the
Chap.  VII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM,  6^
Sinha-mukha  (lion-mouthed)  type,  while  those  that  can not  be  seen,  should  be  removed  with  the  help  of  the Kanka-mukhas  (  heron-mouthed  )  instruments,  etc., according  to  the  directions  laid  down  in  the  Shastras medical  or  surgical  works  of  recognised  authority). The  Kanka-mukhas  are  the  best  of  all  other  types  of instruments,  inasmuch  as  the}'-  can  be  inserted  and  taken out  without  the  least  difficulty,  are  capable  of  drawing out  a'Shalyam  with  the  greatest  ease,  and  are  applicable to  all  parts  of  the  human  body  'be  they  an  artery  or  a bone- joint.)
Thus  end.s  the  sevenih  chapter  "(  ihc  SiUiasthSnam  of  the  Sushruta SamhitS  which  treats  of  the  shape,  construction  and  dimensions  of  surgical appliances.
C  H  A  P  T  E  R    V  I  I  I.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of instruments  used  in  connection  with  a  surgical  operation. (Shastrarvacharaniyamaclhya^am).
These  instruments  are  twenty  in  number  such  as, the  Mandalagram,  the  Karapatram,  the  Vriddhipatram, the  Nakhashastram,  the  Mudrik^,  the  Utpalapatram, the  Arddhadh^ram,  the  Suchi,  the  Kushapatram,  the Atemukham,  the  Shardrimukham,  the  Antarmukhanij the  Trikurchakam,  the  Kuth^rika,  the  Vrihimukham,  the Ar^i,  the  Vetasapatrakam,  the  Vadisha,the  Dantashanku, and  the  Eshani.*
■  The  MandaMgram  measures  six  fingers  in  length  and  is provided  with  a  round  or  circular  face.  The  Karapatram  is  the  same  as the  modern  saw.  The  term  Vriddhipatram  signifies  a  razor.  A  Vriddhi- patram measures  seven  fingers  in  length,  the  handle  alone  measuring five  fingers.  The  Nakhasastram  is  the  same  as  the  modern  nail-clipper, the  blade  of  the  instrument  measuring  a  finger  in  breadth.  The  Utpala- patram resembles  a  lotus  leaf  in  shape.  The  Arddhadhfiram  (lancet) measures  eight  fingers'  breadth' in  length,  being  one  finger  broad  at  the middle,  and  two  fingers  at  the  blade.  The  Suchi.  is  the  same  as  the modern  needle.  The  Kushapatram  is  so  called  from  its  resemblance  to  the blade  of  a  Kusha-grass.  An  Atemukham  resembles  the  bill  of  a  bird  of  the Ate  species.  The  blade  of  an  Atemukham  measures  two  fingers  in length,  the  handle  measuring  five  fingers  and  thus  giving  an  entire length  of  seven  fingers.  The  SharSrimukham  (scissors)  is  so-called  from  the resemblance  of  its  blades  to  the  bills  of  a  Shariri  bird  and  looks  somewhat like  a  modern  black-smith's  clipper,  the  measure  of  its  entire  length  being twelve  fingers.  The  Antarmukham  is  semicircular  in  shape  and  is  provid- ed with  a  toothed  edge  like  that  of  a  hand-saw.  The  Trikurchakam  (trocar) is  provided  with  three  separate  blades.  The  intervening  space  between the  couple  of  blades  attached  to  a  handle  measuring  five  fingers  in  length, is  equal  to  ihe  width  of  a  Vrihiseed,  its  entire  length  being  eight  fingeis.
Chap.  VIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  65
Of  the  abovesaid  instruments  the  Mandalagram  and the  Karapatram  should  be 'used  in  incising  and  scraping. The  Vriddhipatram,  the  Nakhasastram,  the  Mudrik^, the  Utpalapatram,  and  the  Arddhadharam,  should  be employed  in  incising  f  Chhedanam  )  and  excising (Bhedanani)  ;  and  the  Kushapatram,  the  Shuchi,  the Atemukham,  the  Shararimukham,  the  Trikurchakam  and the  Antarmukham  should  be  made  use  of  in  exudating or  secreting  (Visravanam.i  The  Kutharika,  the  Vrihimu- kham,  the  Ara,  the  Vetasapatram  and  the  Suchi  (needle) should  be  used  in  puncturing.  The  Vadisha  and  the Danta-Shanku  should  be  used  in  extracting  sohd  bodies. The  Eshani  1  probe  or  director)  in  probing  or  search- ing the  course  or  direction  of  the  pus  (in  a  suppurated part),  and  the  Suchi  (needle;  should  be  used  in  suturing. Thus  we  have  explained  the  eight  different  func- tions ol  the  instruments  in  connection  with  surgical operations.
The  kutharika  (small,  blunt  axe)  measures  seven  lingers  and  a  half  in  liic handle,  the  blade  is  half  a  finger  in  width  and  is  blunted  like  the  tooth  of'a cow.  The  Vrihimukham  measures  six  fingers  in  its  entire  length  and its  top  is  like  that  of  a  Vrihi  seed,  and  the  edge  is  cut  into  small  thorn- like projections.  The  Ar5  resembles  the  awl  of  a  cobbler  and  measures ten  fingers  in  its  entire  length,  the  blade  is  wide  as  the  seed  of  a sesamum  and  has  the  girth  of  a  Durva  (grass)  stem.  The  Vetasapatram (knife)  resembles  the  leaf  of  a  Vetasa  plant.  The  blade  is  four  fingers in  length,  one  finger  in  width,  and  is  keenly  edged,  the  handle  measur- ing four  fingers  in  length.  The  Vadisha  is  shaped  like  a  modern fishing  hook.  The  Danta-shanku  (pincers  for  extracting  teeth)  somewhat resembles  the  Vrihimukham  in  shape.  The  face  of  an  Eshani  (probe)  is like  that  of  a  Gandupada  (earth-worm). 9
66  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  Ylll.
No^v  we  shall  deal  with  the  mode  ol  handling the  abovesaid  instruments. — The  Vriddhipatram  and other  instruments  for  excising  (Bhedanam;  should  be caught  hold  of  at  a  part  between  the  blade and  the  handle.  In  acts  of  scraping  the  Vriddhipatram and  the  MandaUgram  should  be  handled  with  the palm  of  the  hand  slightly  turned  up.  The  instruments for  secreting  should  be  caught  hold  of  at  the  roots of  their  blades  at  the  time  of  using  them,  while  in the  case  of  a  king,  an  old  man,  a  timid  or  a delicate  person,  a  child,  a  woman  and  specially  in  the case  of  a  prince  of  the  royal  blood,  the  Trikurchakam should  be  used  when  any  secreting  or  exudating  opera- tion would  be  necessary.  The  handle  of  a  Vrihi- mukham  should  be  kept  concealed  within  the  palm of  the  hand  and  the  blade  should  be  caught  hold  of with  the  thumb  and  the  index  finger  (Pradeshini). The  Kuth^rika  should  be  first  supported  on  the  left hand  and  then  struck  with  the  thumb  and  third  finger of  the  right.  The  Ara,  the  Karapatram  and  the Eshani,  should  be  caught  hold  of  at  their  roots.  The rest  of  the  surgical  instruments  should  be  grappled according  to  requirements.
The  abovesaid  instruments  are  shaped  like  things which  their  very  names  imply,  as  ha^^e  been  al- ready described.  The  Nakashastram  and  the  Eshani measure  eight   fingers   in   length.     The   Suchi    (needle)
Chap.  VIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  67
shall  be  described  later  un.  The  top-ends  of  the  Vadisha and  the  Danta-Shankhu  pental  pincers';  are  a  little bent  down  and  their  faces  are  made  to  resemble sharp  thorns,  or  the  newly  sprouted  leaves  of  a barley  plant.  The  top-end  of  an  Eshani  closely resembles  the  mouth  of  an  earth-worm.  Tlie  lenj^th of  a  Mudrika  should  be  made  equal  to  that  of  the top  phalanges  of  the  index  finger  'of  a  man  of avera'ge  height.)  A  Shararimukham  measures  ten  fingers in  length.  The  rest  of  the  instruments  are  mostly made  to  measure  six  fingers  in  length.
Commendable  features  in  a  Surgi- cal instrument  : —Instruments  that  are  fitted with  handles  of  easy  grip  and  are  made  of  good  and pure  iron,  well  shaped,  sharp,  and  are  set  with  edges that  are  not  jagged  and  end  in  well  formed  points  or tops,  should  be  deemed  as  the  best  of  their  kind.
Curvature,  bluntness  ( Kuntha— lit  :— incapable  of cutting  hair  ,  unequal  sharpness  of  the  edge,  rough- edgedness,  over- thickness,  over-thinness,  over-lengthi- ness,  and  over-shortness  are  the  defective  traits  in  a surgical  instrument.  Those  possessed  of  contrary  features should  be  used.  But  a  Karapatram  set  with  a  very rough  (dentated)  edge  may  be  used  for  the  purpose  of sawing  the  bones.
A  surgical  instrument  meant  *'or  excision  'Bhedanann should  be  set  with  an  edge  as  thin   as  that  of  a  Musura
68  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  VIII.
pulse  'lentil  seed  ,  while  an  instrument  used  in  scraping should  be  set  with  an  edge  half  as  thin  as  that  of the  former.  An  instrument  used  either  in  connection with  the  measures  of  secretion  or  cutting  by  uplifting (Vyadhanam)  should  be  set  with  an  edge  as  fine  as  the human  hair,  while  an  instrument  of  incision  should  have an  edge  half  as  thin  as  that  of  the  former.
Surgical  instruments  should  be  tempered  with  one of  the  three  substances  such  as,  alkali,  water,  and  oil. Instruments  used  in  cutting  an  arrow,  a  bone,  or  any foreign  matter  (Shalyami  pricked  into  the  human body,  should  be  tempered  with  alkali,  whereas  those  that are  made  use  of  in  cutting,  cleaving,  and  lopping  off  the flesh  from  an  affected  part),  should  be  tempered  with water.  Instruments  used  in  opening  Vyadhanam) a  vein  (Shira)  or  in  cutting  open  a  nerve  .Sna)^!: should  be  tempered  with  oil,  and  should  be  whetted upon  a  species  of  stone-slab  resembling  a  Masha  pulse  in colour,  and  their  set- edge  should  be  protected  by  putting it  in  a  sheath  made  of  Sh^lmali  wood.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject :— An  instrument,  well-ground,  well-shaped,  fitted with  a  convenient  handle  and  capable  of  (laterally) cutting  a  hair  in  two  and  made  according  to  measures laid  down  in  the  Shastras,  should  be  alone  used  in  a surgical  operation.
Chap.  VIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  6g
The  Inferior  or  substitutive  instru- ments (the  Anu-Shastras  : — The  skin  of  bamboos, crystals,  bits  of  glass,  Kuruvindas  Ca  sort  of  crystal"* leeches,  fire,  alkali,  nails,  the  leaves  of  trees  known  as Goji,  Shephalika  and  Shakapatra,  the  tender  sprouts of  corn,  hair,  and  the  fingers,  should  be  included  within the  category  of  the  minor  instruments  of  surgery  and (which  may  be  used  in  certain  instances  in  substitution for  the  principal  and  usual  ones.
Metrical  texts  :— The  four  articles  such  as strips  of  bamboo  skin,  crystals,  bits  of  glass,  and  the  rock known  as  Kuruvinda,  should  be  used  by  an  intelli- gent physician  in  incising  or  excising  Bhedanam  i  opera- tions, where  the  patient  would  be  found  to  have  a  dread of  the  knife,  or  too  young  to  be  surgically  operated  upon with  it,  or  where  the  proper  instrument  cannot  be  pro- cured. The  nails  of  fingers  should  be  used  in  operations of  incising,  excising  or  extracting  in  (substitution  for  the instruments  enjoined  to  be  used  for  the  purpose),  when such  a  course  would  appear  feasible.  The  processes  of applying  alkalis,  leeches  and  cauterisation  will  be  dealt with  later  on.  In  Diseases  affecting  the  eyelids  or  the cavity  of  the  mouth,  operations  for  the  purposes  of secreting  or  evacuating  'the  accumulated  pus  or phlegm),  may  be  performed  with  the  leaves  of Shakapatra,  Shephalika  or  Gojis.  In  the  absence  of a  probe  or  director,  searching  may  be  done  with  the  help
^o
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      L  Chap.  vili.
of  a  finger,  or  with  a  hair,  or  with  a  corn  sprout. An  intelligent  physician  should  deem  it  his  im- perative duty  to  get  his  surgical  instruments  made by  a  skilful  and  experienced  blacksmith,  and  of pure,  strong  and  sharp  iron  steel  >.  A  physician,  skilled in  the  art  of  using  surgical  instruments,  is  always successful  in  his  professional  practice,  and  hence  the practice  of  surgery  should  be  commenced  at  the  very outset  of  medical  studies.
Thus  ends  the   eighth   chapter    of  the    Sutrasthiinam    in  the    Sushruta SamhitS  which  treats  of  Surgical|Instruments.
CHAPTER     IX. Now   we   shall  discuss   the  Chapter  which  treats  of practical  instructions  in  surgical  operations  (Yogya- Sutra).
The  preceptor  should  see  his  disciple  attends  the practice  of  surgery  even  if  he  has  already  thoroughly mastered  the  several  branches  of  the  science  of  Medicine, or  has  perused  it  in  its  entirety.  In  all  acts  connected with  surgical  operations  of  incision,  etc.  and  injection of  oil,  etc.  the  pupil  should  be  fully  instructed  as  regards the  channels  along  or  into  which  the  operations  or applications  are  to  be  made  (Karma-patha\  A  pupil, otherwise  well  read,  but  uninitiated  into  the  practice  (ol' medicine  or  surgery)  is  not  competent  >  to  take  in  hand the  medical  or  Surgical  treatment  of  a  disease  .  The  art of  making  specific  forms  of  incision  should  be  taught  by making  cuts  in  the  body  of  a  Pushpaphala  (a  kind  of gourd  ,  Alavu,  watermelon,  cucumber,  or  Ervaruka.  The art  of  making  cuts  either  in  the  upward  or  downward direction  should  be  similarly  taught.  The  art  of  making excisions  should  be  practically  demonstrated  by  making openings  in  the  body  of  a  full  water-bag,  or  in  the bladder  of  a  dead  animal,  or  in  the  side  of  a  leather pouch  full  of  slime  or  water.  The  art  of  scraping  should be  instructed  on  a  piece  of  skin  on  which  the  hair has  been  allowed  to  remain.     The    art    of  venesection
72  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [Chap.  IX.
c
(Vedhya)  should  be  taught  on  the  vein  of  a  dead  animal, or  with  the  help  of  a  lotus  stem.  The  art  of  probing and  stuffing  should  be  taught  on  worm  (Ghuna)  eaten wood,  or  on  the  reed  of  a  bamboo,  or  on  the  mouth  of  a dried  Alavu  (gourd).  The  art  of  extracting  should be  taught  by  withdrawing  seeds  from  the  kernel  of a  Vimbi,  Vilva  or  Jack  fruit,  as  well  as  by  extract- ing teeth  trom  the  jaws  of  a  dead  animal.  The  act of  secreting  or  evacuating  should  be  taught  on  the surface  of  a  Shalmali  plank  covered  over  with  a  coat of  bee's  wax,  and  suturing  on  pieces  of  cloth,  skin or  hide.  Similarly  the  art  of  bandaging  or  ligaturing should  be  practically  learned  by  tying  bandages  round the  specific  limbs  and  members  of  a  full-sized  doll  made of  stuffed  linen.  The  art  of  tying  up  a  Karna-sandhi (severed  ear-lobe)  should  be  practically  demonstrated on  a  soft  severed  muscle  or  on  flesh,  or  with  the  stem of  a  lotus  lily.  The  art  of  cauterising,  or  applying alkaline  preparations  \^causticsj  should  be  demonstrated on  a  piece  of  soft  flesh  ;  and  lastly  the  art  of  inserting syringes  and  injecting  enemas  into  the  region  of  the bladder  or  into  an  ulcerated  channel,  should  be  taught (by  asking  the  pupil)  to  insert  a  tube  into  a  lateral fissure  of  a  pitcher,  full  of  water _,  or  into  the  mouth of  a  gourd  (Alavu).
Authoritative   verses   on   the    sub- ject :— An   intelligent  physician   who   has   tried  his
Chap.   IX.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  73
prentice  hand  in  surgery  ion  such  articles  of  experiment as,  gourds,  etc.,  or  has  learnt  the  art  with  the  help  of things  as  stated  above  ,  or  has  been  instructed  in  the  art of  cauterisation  or  blistering  (application  of  alkali)  by experimenting  on  things  which  are  most  akin,  or  simi- lar to  the  parts  or  members  of  the  human  body  they are  usually  applied  to,  will  never  lose  his  presence  of mind  in  his  professional  practice. >
Thus  ends   the  ninth   chapter   of    the   SutrasthSnam    in   the    Sushruta Samhit^  which  treats  of  Instructions  in  Surgical  operations.
10
C  HAPTER    X.
Now  we  sliall  discuss  the  Chapter  wliich  treats  of the  essential  qualifications  of  a  physician  before he    formally     enters     his    profession      (Vishlkha'-
nupravcshaniya-madhya'yam).
A  physician  haying  thoroughly  studied  the  Science  of medicine,  and  fully  pondered  on  and  yerified  the  truths he  has  assimilated,  both  by  obseryation  and  practice,  and haying  attained  to  that  stage  of  (lucid )  kno^vledge,  ^yhich \yould  enable  him  to  make  a  clear  exposition  of  the science  (^vhene^■er  necessary),  should  open  his  medical career  conmience  practising)  with  the  permission  of the  king  of  his  country.  He  should  be  cleanly  in  his habits  and  well  shaAed.  and  should  not  allow  his  nails to  grow.  He  should  wear  white  garments,  put  on  a pair  of  shoes,  carry  a  stick  and  an  umbrella  in  his  hands, and  walk  about  with  a  mild  and  benignani  look  as  a friend  of  all  created  beings,  read}-  to  help  all,  and  frank and  friendly  in  his  talk  and  demeanour,  and  neyer  allow- ing the  full  control  of  his  reason  or  intellectual  powers to  be  in  any  way  disturbed  or  interfered  with.
A  physician,  haying  met  with  a  messenger  of happy  augury,  or  having  been  encouraged  on  his  journey by  the  notes  of  auspicious  birds  or  sights,  should  go  to the  house  of  his  patient.     [Then,  haying  entered   the
Chap.   X.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  >jz^
sick  room],  the  physician  should  \ie\v  the  bod>'  of  his patient,  touch  it  with  his  own  hands,  and  enquire (about  his  complaint  .  SeNcral  authorities  hold  that  these three,  (inspection,  touch  and  questioning;  largely  form the  means  of  our  ascertaining  the  nature  of  a  disease. But  that  is  not  correct,  inasmuch  as  the  five  sense- organs  of  hearing,  sight,  etc.  and  oral  enquiry  material- ly contribute  to  a  better  diagnosis.
Diseases,  which  are  to  be  diagnosed  with  the  help  of the  organ  of  hearing,  will  be  fully  treated,  later  on,  in the  Chapter  on  Vrana-Srava  (secretions  from  an  ulcer). The  wind  (Vayu),  making  the  blood  ebullient,  forces  it  up with  a  distinctly  audible  report  and  thus  affects  the  sense of  hearing.  But  this  will  be  dealt  with  later  on  in  the abovesaid  chapter.  The  heat  and  coldness  of  the  body, or  the  gloss,  roughness,  hardness,  or  softness  of  the  skin of  the  affected  part  as  in  fever,  or  in  an  oedematous swelling  of  the  body,  are  perceptible  by  the  sense  of touch.  Fullness  or  emaciation  of  the  body  (cachexia), state  and  indications  of  ^■itality,  strength,  complexion, etc.  are  perceived  by  the  sense  of  sight.  Secretions  or discharges  (from  the  inflamed  mucous  membrane  of the  urethral  in  Prameha  etc.,  should  be  tested  with the   organ   of  taste.*     The  characteristic  smell  emitted
*  The  .-jwecl,  ur  an}'  olher  ta.'^lc  of  ihe  dibcharj^eb  should  Ijt;  inleiicd from  the  fad  of  iheir  bting  or  not  being  swarmed  wiili  hosts  of  ants or  flies,  etc.
76  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  X.
by    an   ulcer   in   its   critical  stage   f  Arishta)  should  be determined  with  the   help   of  the  organ  of  smell.
While  such  facts  as  the  time  or  season  (of  the  first appearance)  of  the  disease,  the  caste  which  the  patient belongs  to,  and  things  or  measures  which  tend  to bring  about  a  manifest  amelioration  of  the  disease, or  prove  comfortable  to  the  patient  (Satm3'ami as  well  as  the  cause  of  the  disease,  the  aggrava- tion of  pain,  the  strength  of  the  patient,  and  his state  of  digestion  and  appetite,  the  emission  of stool,  urine  and  flatus,  or  their  stoppage,  and  the maturity  of  the  disease  as  regards  time,  should be  specifically  ascertained  by  directly  interrogating  the patient  (on  those  subjects).  Though  the  abovesaid  five organs  of  sense,  like  the  three  fundamental  vital  humours, help  us  to  make  the  correct  diagnosis  of  a  disease, still  the  objects  locally  perceived  by  these  senses should  not  be  left  out  of  account  in  ascertaining  its specific  nature.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — A  disease  wrongly  observed  or  incorrectly described,  or  wrongly  diagnosed,  is  sure  to  mislead  a physician.
Ha^'ing  made  these  observations  the  physician  will try  to  cure  diseases  that  are  curable,  adopt  palliative measures  in  cases  where  palliation  is  the  only  remedy that  can  be  offered,  and  give  up  a  case  which  is   beyond
Chap.  X.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM  .  ^7
all  medical  treatment,  and  mosth'  those  which  are  of  more than  a  year's  standing.  Diseases  affecting  a  Br^hmana well  versed  in  the  Vedas_,  or  a  king,  or  a  woman,  or  an infant,  or  an  old  man,  or  a  timid  person,  or  a  man  in  the royal  service,  or  a  cunning  man,  or  a  man  who  pretends to  possess  a  knowledge  of  the  science  of  medicine,  or  a man  who  conceals  his  disease,  or  a  man  of  an  excessively irascible  temperament,  or  a  man  who  has  no  control over  his  senses,  or  a  man  in  extremely  indigent  cir- cumstances of  life  or  without  any  one  to  take  care  of him,  are  apt  to  run  into  an  incurable  type  though appearing  in  a  common  or  curable  form  at  the  outset. The  physician,  who  practises  his  art  with  a  regard  to these  facts,  acquires  piety,  wealth,  fame  and  all  wished for  objects  in  life.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — A  physician  should  abjure  the  company  of women,  nor  should  he  speak  in  private  to  them  or joke  with  them.  A  physician  is  forbidden  to  take anything  but  cooked  rice  from  the  hands  of  a  woman.
Thus   ends    the    tenth    Chapter   of  the  Sutrasthanam   in    the    Sushruta Samhiti  which  treats  of  the  essential  qualifications  of  a  physician.
CHAPTER     XI.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of  the pharmacy  of  alkalis  or  potential  cauteries  (KshaTa- pa'ka-vidhi-madhya'yam).
In  cases  that  require  incising,  excising  and  scraping, alkalis  or  alkaline  preparations  are  of  greater  importance than  surgical  instruments  and  appliances  (both  principal and  secondary  or  substitutive,  as  they  are  possessed  of the  virtues  of  subduing  the  three  deranged  bodily humours    such  as  wind,  bile  and  phlegm).
The  etymological  signification  of  the  term  Kshara (alkalis)  is  based  on  their  property  of  corroding  i the  skin or  the  flesh  of  an  affected  part  of  the  body),  or  on  their peculiar  quality  in  destroying  the  skin  and  flesh  where such  an  effect  is  desired  .  Since  a  variety  of  substances enter  into  the  composition  of  Kshara  alkalis  ,  they  are endued  with  the  virtue  of  subduing  the  three  deranged bodily  humours.  Owing  to  their  white  colour,  Ksharas should  be  included  within  the  category  of  cooling substances  ( Saumya'.
But  since  many  drugs  or  substances  of  a  hot  or  fiery nature  ( Agneya)  enter  into  their  composition,  KshiCras (alkalis)  are  endued  with  the  properties  of  blistering, burning,   suppurating   •  Pachana  >,  opening  etc.,   without
Chap,   XI.  1  SUTRASTHA'NAM,
79
involving  any  contradiction  to  their  generic  iSanimya) nature,  and  lience  the}-  are  included  within  the  list  of those  substances  which  are  both  hot  and  cooling  (Saum^^a and  Agne^'a  in  their  ^'irtues.  The}'  are  pungent  in taste,  of  a  heat- making  potency,  irritant,  digestive, corrosive,  absorbent,  liquefacient,  improve  unhealth}' sores  and  granulation,  and  act  as  styptic  and paralysing  agents.  They  exercise  destructive  action on  aaimal  tissues.  They  are  antitoxic,  anthelmintic and  possess  the  propert}-  of  curing  mucous  accumu- lations in  the  intestines.  They  tend  to  reduce  fat  and phlegm  and  they  have  the  ^'irtue  of  destroying  skin diseases.  In  large  doses,  'alkalis)  have  the  effect  of destroying  the  virile  potency  of  a  man.
Kshara  (caustics  may  be  grouped  under  two  distinct heads  according  to  their  mode  of  administration  \  such as  the  Pratisaraniya  i  for  external  application)  and  the Pania  i  alkaline  potions  .  Alkaline  preparations  should be  externally  used  in  such  skin  diseases  as  Kitima, Dadru,  Kilas,  Mandala,  Fistula  in  ano,  tumour,  bad ulcer  fDushta  Vrana',  sinus,  Charma-kila,  Tilkalaka, Nacchya,  Vyanga,  Mashaka  and  external  abscesses and  hoemorrhoids.  In  cases  of  worms  and  poisoning as  well  as  in  the  seven  forms  of  diseases  which  affect  the cavity  of  the  mouth,  such  as  Upajihva,  Upakusha, Danta-Vaidarbha,  and  in  the  three  types  of  Rohini, external   applications   of    alkalis    act   like   substitutive
go  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.         [Chap.  XI.
surgical  instruments.  Alkaline  potions  or  any  other internal  use  of  alkalis,  should  be  prescribed  in  cases of  Gulma  (abdominal  glands;,  Ascites,  loss  of appetite,  indigestion,  flatulent  distension  of  the  abdomen with  suppression  of  stool  and  urine,  urinary  calculi, stone  in  the  bladder,  internal  abscesses,  worms  in  the intestines  and  hcemorrhoids,  as  well  as  for  subduing or  eliminating  any  sort  of  poison  from  the  system.
Alkalis  or  alkaline  potions  will  prove  positively injurious  to  a  patient  laid  up  with  fever  or  hsemoptysis, to  a  man  of  bilious  temperament,  to  an  infant,  or  to  an old  man,  and  they  will  work  similar  mischief  in  a  weak person,  or  in  a  patient  suffering  from  vertigo,  insensi- bility, syncope  and  Timira  (darkness  of  vision).  These preparations  of  Alkalis  should  be  made  in  one  and the  same  way  b}-  filtering  ;  and  we  reserve  the  full description  of  this  process  for  another  occasion.
Alkalis  for  external  application  are  prepared  in three  different  potencies  ;  the  mild,  middling  and strong  (extremel}'  irritant'.  A  physician  wishing to  prepare  such  an  alkali,  should  first  purif^^  his body  and  mind,  and  observe  a  l^st  on  a  day  in  autumn marked  by  auspicious  astral  combinations.  Then having  ascended  the  brow  of  a  hill,  he  should  select  a full  grown  Ashita-mushka  (Ghanta  parul  i  tree  of  middle age,  and  growing  on  soil  recommended  in  the  works on   pharmacy   and  not   anywise  affected.    Then  having
Chap.  XI.  SUTRASTHANAM.  8l
formally  invoked  the  spirit  of  the  aforesaid  tree, which  bears  no  white  flowers)  the  physician  should fell  it  on  the  day  following, — reciting  the  Mantra  which reads  as  : — "  O  thou  possessed  of  mighty  virtues,  O thou  endued  with  fiery  potency,  may  thy  potency never  decrease  or  vanish.  Stay  here,  O  thou  blissful  one, execute  my  work,  and  after  the  performance  thereof thou  shalt  be  at  libert}-  to  ascend  to  the  heavenly regions."
Then  haA'ing  performed  the  Homa  ceremon}'  with thousands  of  white  and  red  flowers,  the  physician should  cut  the  wood  of  the  abovesaid  tree  into small  pieces  and  put  them  in  a  place  pro- tected from  the  wind.  Then  having  placed  pieces  of unslaked  limestone  over  them,  the  physician  should burn  them  to  ashes  with  the  lighted  faggots  of  dried sesamum  plants.  Then  after  the  fire  has  fairly burnt  itself  out,  the  ashes  of  the  limestone  and  the Ghanta-parula  wood  should  be  separately  collected and  stored.  Similarly  the  wood  as  well  as  the leaves,  roots  and  fruits  of  Kutaja,  Palasha,  Ashva- karna,  Paribhadra,  Vibhitaka,  Aragvadha,  Tilvaka, Arka,  Snuhi,  Apamarga,  Patala,  Naktamala,  Vrisha, Kadali,  Chitraka,  Putika,  Indra-Vrilvsha,  Asphota, Ashvamaraka,  Saptachchhada,  Agnimantha,  Gunja, and   the    four   species    of  Koshataki,    should   be  burnt
down  to  ashes. II
S2  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [Chap.  XI.
Then  a  Drona  measure  of  the  ashes  thus  prepared* should  be  dissolved  and  stirred  up  in  six  Drona  measures of  pure  water  or  cow's  urine,  and  be  filtered twenty-one  times  in  succession.  The  ('alkaline  water filtered  as  abo\-e)  should  ])e  kept  in  a  large  caldron over  a  fire  and  boiled  by  gently  agitating  it  with  a ladle.  .  It  should  be  taken  down  from  the  fire  when  bv gradual  stirring,  the  saturated  water  would  appear transparent,  slimy,  red  and  irritating.  It  should then  be  filtered  through  a  piece  of  clean  linen, and  the  dregs  thrown  away.  After  this  a  Kudava measure  and  a  half  12  Palas)  of  the  (abovesaid) saturated  or  alkaline  water  should  be  taken  out of  the  caldron,  and  the  rest  should  be  again  kept  boil- ing over  the  fire.  Following  this,  substances  laiown as  Kata-Sharkara,  the  ashes  of  the  burnt  limestone pre^■iously  obtained,  Kshirapakas  (fresh  water  oysters) and  Sankhanabhi,  should  be  burnt  red  hot  in equal  proportions,  and  then  immersed  and  pressed in  the  Kudaba  measure  of  alkaline  water  previoush" set     apart     in     an     iron     basin     as    above    described.
Then  having  immersed  eight  Pala  measures  of  the substances  known  as  the  Shankhanabhi  etc.,  in  the abovesaid  alkaline  water,  the  physician  should  boil it    by     continuous     and     steady     stirring,   care  being
*  Two  piuia  of  tht    buinl  ashes  of  Ghanla-panila  and    one  pari    of  ihc ashes  of  Kuiaja,  n^Ic.
Chap.  XI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  8
o
taken  not  to  make  it  of  too  thin  nor  of  tod  thick a  consistency.  Then  the  basin  or  the  caldron should  be  taken  down  from  the  oven,  and  its  contents poured  into  an  iron  pitcher,  carefully  covering  its mouth  after  filling  it.  The  alkali  thus  prepared  is called  the  Kshara  (alkali  of  middling  potency,  which, if  prepared  without  the  subsequent  addition  (lit  : throw-over)  of  the  ashes  of  Katasharkara,  etc.,  goes  by the  name  of  mild  alkali  'IVLi-idu  Kshara).  Similarly,  alkali prepared  with  the  addition  of  the  powders  of  the  drugs known  as  Danti,  Dravanti,  Chitraka,  Langulaki,  Putika- Pravala  Talpatri,  \'idha,  Suvarchika,  Kanaka-Kshiri, Hingu,  Vacha,  and  Visha,  or  with  as  many  of  them  as  are available,  each  weighing  four  tolas,  is  called  the  strong Kshara  (extremely  irritating  alkali).  These  alkaline  pre- parations of  different  potencies,  should  be  severally  used in  cases  where  their  adnn'nistrations  would  be  clearlv indicated.  An  alkaline  preparation,  any  way  weakened, should  be  strengthened  by  adding  to  it  alkaline  water (water  saturated  with  an  alkali)  as  before  described.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject ;  The  commendable  features  in  an  alkali  are based  on  its  whiteness,  on  its  being  neither  too  mild  nor too  strong,  on  its  gloss  and  sliminess,  on  its  sticking  to the  place  of  application,  and  on  its  power  of  secreting (Abhisyandi  the  morbid  fluid,  and  on  its  rapid  effect. On  the  other  hand,  its  defective  traits  consist  in  its  being
8^  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        |  Chap.  XI.
too   m'lld,  of  excessive  whiteness,  excessive  strength  or
irritability,  of  over-sliminess,     excessive   stickiness  or
thickness,     insufficient    boiling,     and     insiifiiciency  of component  ingredients.
A  patient  laid  up  with  a  disease  amenable  to  an application  of  alkali  potential  cautery  or  caustic)  should be  kept  in  a  spacious  chamber,  and  should  not  be  ex- posed to  draughts  and  to  the  hot  rays  of  the  sun, [Then  the  physician  having  secured]  the  necessary appliances  etc,  as  already  laid  down  in  the  Chapter  V, should  view  the  part  of  the  patient's  body  to  which the  alkali  is  to  be  applied.  The  affected  part  should be  then*  rubbed  or  scarified t  with  an  alkali,  and  covered overt  with  a  piece  of  linen.  The  alkaline  prepara- tion should  be  applied  with  a  rod  or  director*  and  kept undisturbed  for  a  period  needed  to  articulate  a  hundred long  letter  sounds).
Metrical  texts  :  The  perfect  burning  (blis- tering, should  be  inferred  from  the  black  colour  of  the skin  of  the  affected  part.  Madhuka  and  the  substances included  within  the  Amla-varga  (group  of  acid  drugs) pasted  with  clarified  butter,  should  be  applied  to  allay the  incidental  burning  isensation).     A  plaster  composed
♦  In  a  case  brought  about  by  (Pitta)  ascendency  of  the  deranged  bile.
t  It  sliould  be  scraped  with  the  alkali  where  the  skin  would  appear hard  and  benumlied  owinp;  In  ihc  action  of  the  deranged  vital  winds  (V5yu).
i  In  a  case  of  deranged  phlegm  (Kafa)  the  affected  part  being  marked by  itching  and  swelling.
Chap.   XI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  g^
of  the  shreds  of  Amla-Kaiijika,  sesamum  and  Madhiikam taken  in  equal  parts,  and  pasted  together,  should  be applied  to  the  part  burnt  with  an  alkali  ;  in  the  event of  the  latter  having  failed  to  produce  the  desired  effect owing  to  the  disease  being  deepl}"  seated.  Madhukam and  the  Kalka  paste  of  sesamum  mixed  with  clarified butter  would  cause  such  an   incidental;  ulcer  to  heal.
Now  you  may  ask  the  question  how  can  an  acid subst'ance,  which  is  fiery  in  its  virtue  and  heat-making  in its  potency,  tend  to  subdue  the  effects  of  an  alkali  which is  possessed  of  similar  virtues  and  properties,  instead of  augmenting  them,  as  can  naturally  be  apprehended  ? Well  my  child,  the  question  can  be  fairly  answered by  stating,  that  substances  of  all  tastes  enter  into  the composition  of  an  alkali  except  the  acid  one.  The pungent  (Katu :  taste  is  the  principal  taste  of  an  alkali, while  the  saline  :Lavana  forms  its  minor  or  accessory flavour  LAnurasa).  Xow  this  saline  taste  in  conjunc- tion with  the  acid  one  renounces  its  extremely sharp  or  irritating  property  and  is  thus  transformed  into one  of  sweetness  or  of  soothing  virtue.  Hence  it is  that  an  acid  taste  tends  to  alla)^  the  burning  incidental to  an  application  of  alkali  (potential  caustic)  in  the same  way  as  water  tends  to  put  out  fire.
An  operation  of  perfect  cauterisation  with  an  alkaline application  brings  about  an  amelioration  of  the  disease, or   the   disease   is   entirely   subdued,   accompanied   by
86  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.         [  Chap.  XI.
Hghtne^ss  of  the  limbs  and  absence  of  secretion  from the  affected  part  ;  while  an  insufficient  burning  [of the  part]  is  generally  attended  by  symptoms  of aggravation  of  the  malad}'  and  also  gives  rise  to local  pain,  itching  and  numbness,  [On  tire  other hand],  excessive  burning  [of  the  part]  with  an alkaline  preparation  may  ha^'e  a  fatal  termination,  and is  attended  by  such  symptoms  as  burning,  suppuration, redness,  secretion  in  and  from  the  seat  of  affeqtion. A  feeling  of  languor  and  fatigue  comes  upon  the patient  accompanied  with  thirst,  swooning  and  an  aching sensation.  An  ulcer  incidental  to  a  burn  by  an  alkali should  be  treated  with  a  special  eye  to  the  nature  of  the disease  and  the  deranged  bodily  humour  specifically involved  in  the  case.
A  weak  person,  an  infant,  an  aged  person,  a  man  of timid  disposition,  a  patient  suff'ering  from  abdominal dropsy  with  general  anasarca  or  from  haemoptysis, a  pregnant  woman,  a  woman  in  her  menses,  a  person suffering  from  an  attack  of  high  fever  or  urethral discharges,  or  emaciated  with  chronic  inflammation of  the  lungs,  or  a  person  subjected  to  fits  of  faint- ing or  abnormal  thirst,  or  a  person  suffering from  virile  impotency,  or  whose  testes  ha^'e  become deranged  either  upwards  or  downwards,  or  a  woman suffering  from  retro\'ersion  or  introversion  of  the uterus  or  prolapsus   of  the    vagina,  should   be   deemed
Chap.  XI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  87
unfit  for  being  cauterised  with  alkalis.  More- over their  application  is.  not  to  be  sanctioned  over the  veins,  nerves,  joints,  gristles  or  tender  bones  or cartilages,  sutures,  arteries,  throat,  umbilicus,  genitals, regions  of  Srotas  (external  channels),  parts  covered over  with  a  thin  layer  of  flesh,  inside  the  nails  and other  vulnerable  parts  of  the  body,  nor  in  diseases of  the  eyes,  excepting  those  which  affect  the  eyelids.
Alkalis  fail  to  produce  any  beneficial  effect  in  a patient  suffering  from  oedema  of  the  limbs,  or  suffering from  bone- ache,  or  laid  up  with  a  disease  affecting  the joints  or  the  heart,  or  in  a  person  of  impaired  appetite who  has  lost  all  relish  for  food,  even  when  their  use is  otherwise  indicated.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject :  An  Alkali  adnn'nistered  by  an  ignorant  phv- sician  is  to  be  dreaded  more  than  poison,  fire,  blows with  a  weapon,  thunder-bolts,  or  death  itself  ;  while in  the  hand  of  an  intelligent  physician  it  is  potent enougli  to  speedily  subdue  all  serious  diseases  in  which its  use  is  indicated.
Thus  ends  the  eleventh  Chapter  of  the    Suliasthanam    in    the   Siishiuta Samhita  which  treats  of  the  Pharmacv  of  AlkaHs.
C  H  A  PT  E'R    XII.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of cauteries  and   the    rules   to   be    observed   in    their  use
(Agni-Karma-Vidhimadhyayam).
A  fire  (cautery )  is  better  than  an  Alkali  as  far  as  its healing  property  is  concerned.  A  disease  burnt  with fire,  is  cured  for  good  and  knows  no  recrudescence  ;  and diseases  which  ordinarily  baffle  the  skill  of  a  surgeon or  a  physician,  and  never  prove  themselves  amenable to  medicinal  or  surgical  remedies,  are  found  to  yield to  fire  I  cauterisation  .
The  following  drugs,  articles  and  substances  should be  understood  as  accessories  to  an  act  of  cauterisation, viz.,  Pippali,  the  excreta  of  goats,  the  tooth  of  a  cow I  Godanta'',  Shara,  a  rod,  the  surgical  instrument  known as  the  Jamvavaustha,  articles  made  of  copper  or  silver, honey,  treacle,  oil,  or  any  other  oily  substance.  Out  of these,  Pippali,  the  Godanta,  Shara  and  the  rod  should  be (made  red  hot  and)  used  in  cauterising  the  affected  part in  a  disease  which  is  restricted  only  to  the  skin  ; similarly  the  surgical  instsument  known  as  the Jamvavaustha,  as  well  as  the  appliances  made  of copper  or  silver  should  be  used  in  a  disease  which is  seated  in  the  flesh.  Honey,  treacle  and  oil  should be   (boiled  and    employed   in    cauterising   the   disease
Chap.  XII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  89
which  affects  any  of  the  veins,  nerves,  bones  or'bone- joints.
Cauterisation  is  admissible  in  all  seasons  of  the year  except  summer  and  autumn;  but  no  such  distinction should  be  observed  in  cases  of  impending  danger,  when it  should  be  practised  with  the  help  of  such  appliances of  a  contrary  (cooling)  nature,  [as  wet  sheets,  cooling drinks  and  cooling  plasters,  etc.]
In  all  diseases  and  in  all  seasons  of  the  year,  the patient  should  be  fed  on  a  diet  of  slimy  (mucilaginous) food  before  actually  applying  the  cautery  ;  while  the patient  should  be  kept  on  an  empty  stomach  before  the act  where  the  complaint  would  be  a  case  of  Mudagarbha rfalse  presentation),  fistula  in  ano,  haemorrhoids  or  a disease  affecting  the  cavity  of  the  mouth.
According  to  certain  authorities  the  processes  of cauterisation  may  be  grouped  under  two  heads  according as  the  skin  or  the  flesh  is  cauterised.  The  present  work does  not  lay  an}^  injunction  against  the  cauterisation  of any  nerve,  vein,  bone  or  bone  joint  (as  stated  before). A  burning  of  the  skin  is  accompanied  by  a  peculiar bursting  or  cracking  sound.  The  skin  becomes  con- tracted and  emits  a  fetid  smell.  Similarly,  in  a  case where  the  flesh  is  burnt,  (the  affected  part)  assumes a  dove  color  of  (blackish  brown),  marked  by  pain and  a  little  swelling,  and  the  incidental  ulcer  becomes dr)'  and  contracted.  In  the  case  where  a  nerv^e  or  a  vein
12
90
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.         [  Chap.  Xll.
is  burnt,  the  ulcer  presents  a  raised  (elevated)  and black  aspect  with  the  stoppage  of  all  secretions  ;  while an  ulcer  incidental  to  the  cauterisation  of  any  of  the bone  joints  has  a  parched  red  hue  and  becomes  hard and  rough.
The  regions  of  the  eye-brows,  forehead  and  temple- bones,  should  be  cauterised  in  diseases  affecting  the head  as  well  as  in  a  case  of  Adhimantha  (Ophthalmia). In  diseases  affecting  the  ej'elids  the  eye  should  be covered  over  with  a  moist  piece  of  Alaktaka  (a  thin pad  of  red  pigment  principally  used  in  d3'eing  the  feet of  ladies)  and  the  roots  of  the  eyelashes  should  be  duly cauterised.  Cauterisation  is  specificall}'  enjoined  to be  resorted  to  incases  of  glandular  inflammation,  tumour_, fistula  in  ano,  scrofula,  elephantiasis,  Charmakila,  warts, Tilakalaka,  hernia,  sinus  hoemorrhage,  and  on  the  occa- sion of  cutting  a  vein  or  a  bone  joint,  as  well  as  in the  event  of  the  vital  wind  (Vayu)  being  extremely agitated  and  lodged  in  the  local  skin,  flesh,  vein,  nerves and  the  bone-joints  and  giving  rise  to  excruciating pain  in  and  about  the  ulcer  which  in  consequence presents  a  hard,  raised  and  inert  surface.
The  modes  of  cauterisation   vary   according   to  the
seat  of  the   disease,  and    number  four  in   all,   viz.,  the
Ring,   the   Dot,  the  Lateral  or   Slanting  lines,  and  the Rubbing  modes.
Chap.  XII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
91
Authoritative  verse  on  the  subject :  —
A  physician,  after  having  tarefully  considered  the  seat of  the  disease  and  judiciously  ascertained  the  patient's strength  and  the  situations  of  the  Marmas  the  vital parts  of  the  patient's')  body,  should  resort  to cauterisation  with  an  e3''e  to  the  nature  of  the  malady and  the  then  prevailing  season  of  the  year.
>
The  part,  after  being  properly  cauterised,  should  be rubbed  with  an  unguent  composed  of  honey  and  clarified butter.  A  man  of  bilious  temperament  or  with  a  quantity of  bad  blood  lying  stagnant  and  locked  up  in  any  part of  his  bod}',  or  of  lax  bowels,  a  person  with  any  foreign substance  (such  as  a  thorn  or  a  splinter  still  lodged  in his  body),  a  weak  or  an  old  man,  an  infant,  or  a  man of  timid  disposition,  or  a  person  afflicted  with  a  large number  of  ulcers,  as  well  as  a  patient  suffering  from any  of  the  diseases  in  which  diaphoretic  measures are  forbidden,  should  be  regarded  as  a  subject  unfit  for cauterisation.
Now  we  shall  describe  the  characteristic  sym- ptoms of  the  several  kinds  of  burns  other  than  those caused  (for  surgical  purposes).  Fire  feeds  both upon  fatty  and  hard  fuels,  [such  as  oil  and  logs  of  wood etc.].  Hot  or  boiling  oil  has  the  property  of  permeating or  entering  into   the  minutest   nerves   and  veins,  and
g2  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  Xli.
hence,  it  is  capable  of  burning  the  skin,  etc.  Accord- ingly an  ulcer  incidental  to  such  a  burning  (scald)  is characterised  by  extreme  pain,  etc.
Burns  may  be  grouped  under  four  distinct  heads  viz., the  Plush tam,  the  Dur-Dagdham,  the  Samyag-Dagdham and  the  Ati-Dagdham.  A  burn  characterised  by  the discolouring  of  its  seat  and  extreme  burning  and  mark- ed by  the  absence  of  any  vesicle  or  blister,  is  called  the Plushtam,  from  the  root  "plusha"  to  burn.  A  burn, which  is  characterised  by  the  eruption  of  large  vesicles  or blisters,  and  assumes  a  red  colour,  and  is  characterised  by excessive  burning  and  a  kind  of  drawing  pain,  and  which suppurates  and  takes  a  long  time  to  heal,  is  called  the Dur-Dagdham  (bad  burn  or  scald).  A  burn,  which  is  not deep  (superficial)  and  assumes  the  colour  of  a  ripe  Tala fruit,  and  does  not  present  a  raised  or  elevated  aspect and  develops  the  preceding  symptoms,  is  called  the Samyag-Dagdham  (fully  burnt  one).  A  burn  in  which the  flesh  hangs  down,  and  where  the  veins,  nerves  and bones  are  destroyed,  accompanied  with  fever,  burn- ing, thirst,  fainting  and  such  like  disturbances,  and which  leads  to  a  permanent  disfiguration  of  the  body, retarding  the  healing  of  the  incidental  ulcer  which  leaves a  discoloured  cicatrix  even  after  healing,  is  called  the Ati-Dagdham  (over  burnt  one).  A  physician  should try  to  heal  any  of  these  four  types  of  burns  with  the measures  already  laid  down  before.
Chap.  XII.  ]  sutrasthanam  93
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject.— The  blood  of  a.  man  is  agitated  and  made hot  by  fire,  and  the  blood  thus  heated  tends  to excite  or  causes  it  to  raise  the  bile.  And  since  fire  and  bile (Pittam)  are  similar  in  their  taste,  essence,  effect,  potency and  natal  factors,  the  effects  of  Pittam  (burning  sensation etc.),  are  naturally  aggravated  and  augmented  through  a contact  with  fire.  Blisters  or  vesicles  crop  up  in rapid'  succession  and  mark  the  seat  of  burning,  and fever,  thirst,  etc.,  supervene.
Now  I  shall  describe  the  course  of  medical  treat- ment to  be  adopted  for  the  cure  of  burns.  Hot  and dry  fomentations,  as  well  as  warm  plasters  should  be applied  to  a  burn  of  the  Plushtam  type,  and  a  course of  hot  food  and  drink  should  be  likewise  prescribed  for the  patient.  The  blood  becomes  thin  when  the  body is  diaphorised  by  m.eans  of  warm  fomentations,  and  water, in  virtue  of  its  natural  cooling  properties,  tends  to thicken  the  blood.  Hence  warm  fomentations  or  appli- cations exercise  curative  virtues  in  the  case  of  a burn  of  the  foregoing  t)^pe,  and  water  or  cold  appli- cations produce  the  contrary  effect.*
Both  warm  and  cold  measures  are  to  be  adopted in  the  case   of  a   burn   of  the  Dur-Daghdha  t5''pe,   the
*  By  arresting  the  radiation  of  the  incarcerated  heat  and  thereby favouring  the  elevation  of  the  local  temperature  and  the  increase  of  the burning  sensation.
94  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.        [  Chap,  xil
medicinal  remedies  consisting  of  cold   applications   and unguents  of  clarified  butter.*  •
A  plaster  composed  of  Tugakshiri,  Plaksha,  Chandana, Gairika,  and  Amritam  Guduchi),  pasted  together  with clarified  butter,  should  be  applied  over  a  bum  of  the Samyag-Dagdha  type,  or  the  flesh  of  domestic  or aquatic  or  amphibious  animals  should  be  pasted  and plastered  over  the  affected  part.  A  burn  ol  the present  type,  marked  by  excessive  burning,  should be  medicinally  treated  in  the  same  manner  as  a  case  of bilious  abscess  (Pitta-vidradhi).
In  the  case  of  a  burn  of  the  Ati-Dagdha  (over-burnt  i t3^pe,  the  loose  or  the  dangling  integuments  (skin) and  flesh  should  be  removed,  and  cold  applications  should be  made  over  the  ulcer.  Then  the  affected  part should  be  dusted  over  with  pulverised  Shali  rice, or  a  plaster  composed  of  the  pulverised  skin  of Tinduki  and  clarified  butter  pasted  together,  should  be applied  over  its  surface.!  The  affected  part  should  be covered  over  with  the  leaves  of  Guduchi,  or  of  lotus,  or other  aquatic  plants,  and   all   measures  and  remedial
*  Cold  applications  and  cooling  measures  should  be  resorted  to  in  the case  of  a  deep  and  excessive  burn,  while  the  contrary  should  be  held  as  the correct  remedy  in  the  case  of  a  slight  and  superficial  one.
•)•  Several  authorities  prescribe  Tinduki  bark  and  human  cranium powdered  together  and  mixed  with  clarified  butter,  while  others  prescribe a  decoction  of  Tinduki  bark.
Chap.  XII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  95
agents,  indicated  in  the  case  of  a  bilious  erysipelas, should  be  resorted  to  in  the  present  instance as  well.
A  plaster  composed  of  bee's  wax,  Madhukam, Sarjarasa,  Manjistha,  (red)  Chandanam  and  Murva pasted  together  and  boiled  with  clarified  butter  should be  regarded  as  beneficial  to  burns  of  all  types  to promote  rapid  healing.
In  the  case  of  a  burn  from  boiling  oil,  clarified  butter or  such  like  substances  should  be  externally  applied and  all  measures  which  promote  dryness  of  the part  (Ruksha)  should  be  adopted  without  the  least hesitation.
Now  we  shall  describe  the  s5''mptoms  which  become manifest  in  a  person  [whose  nostrils  and  larynx] are  choked  with  smoke. — The  respiration  becomes laboured  and  hurried  and  the  abdomen  is  distended accompanied  by  constant  sneezing  and  coughing.  The eyes  look  red  and  seem  as  if  burning.  The  patient breathes  out  smoke  and  fails  to  catch  any  other  smell than  that  of  it.  The  sense  of  hearing  is  considerably affected  ;  the  sense  of  taste  becomes  inert ;  fever, thirst  and  a  burning  sensation  supervene  ;  and  the patient  drops  down  utterly  unconscious.
Now  hear  me  discourse  on  the  course  of  medical treatment    to    be     adopted    in     the    case     of     one
g6  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [  Chap.  XII.
over-powered  with  smoke.— Emetics  in  the  shape  of clarified  butter  mixed  with  sugarcane  juice  or  milk saturated  with  the  juice  of  grapes,  or  lumps  of sugar- candy  dissolved  in  an  adequate  quantity  of w^ater,  or  any  acid  potion  slightly  sweetened,  should  be administered  to  th.e  patient.  The  contents  of  the stomach  are  speedily  discharged  by  vomiting ;  the  disten- sion of  the  abdomen  is  removed ;  the  smell  of  smoke  in the  breath  is  mitigated,  and  the  accompanying  fever  with (its  concomitants)  of  sneezing,  languor,  thirst,  cough, laboured  breathing  etc.  is  abated,  and  the  patient  is restored  to  consciousness.  Gargles  having  a  sweet, saline,  acid  or  pungent  (katu)  taste  restore  the  sense- perception  of  the  patient,  and  gladden  his  mind.  Medi- cated snuffs  in  adequate  quantities  should  be  adminis- tered by  a  well-read  physician  to  such  a  patient,  whereby his  head,  eyes  and  neck  would  be  able  to  resume their  normal  functions.  And  a  course  of  diet,  which  is light,  emollient  and  not  acid  in  its  reaction,  should  be prescribed.
Cooling  measures  or  applications  should  be prescribed  or  made  in  the  event  of  any  part  of  the  body being  scorched  by  excessive  heat,  or  by  being  exposed to  a  draught  of  hot  and  parched  wind.  Similarly,  hot and  emollient  measures  or  applications  should  be  re- sorted to  where  any  part  of  the  body  has  become  frozen or  shrivelled  by  snow  or  cold  winds.    A   person  struck
Chap.  XII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  gy
by   lightning  should  be  regarded   as  beyond  the  pale of  medicine.*
*  Additional  texts  :— \\Tieie  the  scorching  would  be  found  to  be  consi- derably extensive  ;  otherwise  such  measures  as  lubrication  with  medicated unguents  etc.  should  be  adopted  in  a  case  where  the  patient  is  picked up  alive.
Thus  ends  the  twelfth  Chapter  of  the  SutrasthSnam  in  the  Sushruta Samhit^  which  treats  of  Cauteries  and  the  rules  to  be  observed  in  their  use.
'3
CHAPTER    XIII.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats of  leeches  and  of  how  and  which  to  use  (Jalaukar- vacharraniyamadhyaryam).
Leeches  should  be  applied  where  the  patient would  be  found  to  be  old  or  imbecile,  or  a  woman, or  an  infant,  or  a  person  of  an  extremely  timid  disposition, or  a  person  of  a  delicate  constitution,  and  as  such  is not  fit  to  be  surgically  operated  upon,  since  this mode  of  bleeding  is  the  gentlest  that  can  be  possibly devised.  The  blood  vitiated  by  the  deranged  wind (Vayu\  bile  (Pittam),  and  phlegm  (Kapham)  should  be respectively  sucked  through  a  horn^  by  leeches  and  a gourd  appliance  (Alavu-Yantra)  or  with  whichsoever of  them  is  available  at  the  time,  irrespective  of  the  cause of  such  vitiation,  whenever  such  bleeding  or  sucking would  be  found  to  be  imperatively  necessary.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — A  CO  whom  is  described  in  the  Shastras  as  of  a hot  or  heat  making  potency,  and  as  possessed  of  a slightly  cooling  (Snigdha)  or  soothing  (Madhura)  pro- perty. Accordingly  it  should  be  used  in  sucking  the blood  vitiated  through  the  action  of  the  deranged  bodily wind.  Leeches,  which  are  born  in  water,  are  possessed  of Madhura  (sweet  or  soothing)  properties,  and  hence  they
Chap.  XIII.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  9^
should  be  used  in  sucking  the  blood  vitiated  throoigh  a deranged  condition  of  the  bile  (Pittam\  The  gourd (Alavu)  is  pungent,  parching  and  irritating  in its  potency  and  should  be  therefore  used  in  sucking the  blood  vitiated  through  the  action  of  the  deranged phlegm  (Kapham).
Mode  of  application  :— The  part  from which  the  blood  is  to  be  sucked  should  be  first  scarified or  slightly  cut  in  two  or  three  places,  and  then  the mouth  or  the  open  end,  of  the  horn,  covered  with  a thin  piece  of  muslin  tied  round  its  edges  should  be placed  over  it  and  sucked  with  the  mouth  through  the aperture  at  its  tip  or  top- end,  or  with  a  gourd  appliance equipped  with  a  lighted  lamp  placed  in  its  inside.
The  term  Jalauka  (leeches)  may  be  etymolo- gically  interpreted  to  mean  creatures  whose  life (Ayu)  or  whose  longevity  is  in,  or  depends  upon,  water, whereas  the  derivative  meaning  of  the  term Jalauka  (leeches)  is  based  upon  the  fact  of  their  dwelling ("Oka"— dwelling  place)  in  water  (Jalam).  Leeches  may be  divided  into  twelve  distinct  species  of  which  six  are venomous,  and  six  non-venomous.  The  six  venomous species  are  named  Krishna,  Karvura,  Alagarda, Indrayudha,  Sdmudrik^  and  Gochandana.  The  leeches of  the  first-named  species  (Krishna)  are  marked  by  thick heads,  and  of  a  colour  resembling  powdered  lampblack. The  leeches  of  the   Karvura  type  have   extended  or
lOO  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XIIl.
elongated  bodies  like  the  Varmifishes,  and  are indented  and  thick  at  the  waist.  The  Alagarda leeches  are  hairy,  thick  and  round  at  the  sides,  and  black at  the  mouth.  The  leeches  of  the  Indrayudha  species are  marked  on  the  surface  with  up-pointed  rainbow coloured  lines.  The  skins  of  the  Samudrikas  are  black- ish yellow,  dotted  over  with  white  spots  of  a  variety of  shapes.  Leeches  which  are  provided  with  narrow mouths  and  are  marked  by  bifurcating  line  at  the bottom  like  the  scrotal  sac  of  a  bull  are  called Gochandanas.
A  person  bitten  by  any  of  the  abovesaid  venomous leeches  has  an  irresistble  inclination  to  scratch  the  seat of  the  bite  which  is  marked  by  a  considerable  swelling. Fever,  with  burning,  retching,  drowsiness  and  delirium supervenes  and  ultimately  the  patient  loses  all  conscious- ness. The  remedy  consists  in  the  administration  of an  anti-toxic  medicine  known  as  Mahagada,  as  snuffs, potions  and  unguents,  etc.  A  bite  by  an  Indrayudha usually  proves  fatal.  Venomous  leeches,  as  well  as  cures for  their  bites,  have  thus  been  described.
The  non-venomous  species  include  Kapilas,  Pingalas, Shankhamukhis,  Musikas,  Pundarimukhis  and  Saravikas. The  Kapilas  are  coloured  like  Manah-Shila  (  realgar  ) at  the  sides,  and  their  backs  are  tinged  with  a glossy  hue  like  that  of  a  Mudga  pulse.  The  Pingalas have    a    reddish    colour,     are     round    in    shape    and
Chap.  XIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAAI.  loi
capable  of  speedy  locomotion.  The  Shankhamuldiis  are marked  by  a  blackish  red  hue  like  that  of  the liver,  are  provided  with  sharp  elongated  moutlis, and  are  capable  of  sucking  blood  with  the  greatest swiftness.  The  Musikas  are  coloured  like  the  common blind  moles,  and  emit  a  fetid  smell  from  their  bodies. The  Pundarimukhas  are  coloured  like  the  IMudga  pulse and  are  so  called  from  the  fact  of  the  resemblance  of their  mouths  to  the  full-blown  lotus  hhes  TPimdarikas). The  Saravikas  have  cold  bodies  marked  with  impress- ions like  lotus  leaves  and  measure  eighteen  fingers' width  in  length,  and  they  should  be  employed  in sucking  blood  from  the  affected  parts  of  lower  animals. This  exhausts  the  list  of  non-venomous  leeches.
The  countries,  such  as  Turkesthan  (Yavana),  the Deccan  (Pandya),  the  tract  of  land  traversed  by  the  Ghaut mountains  (Sahya),  and  Pautana  (modem  Mathura),  are the  natural  habitats  of  these  leeches.  The  leeches, found  in  the  aforesaid  countries,  are  specifically  non- venomous,  strong,  large-bodied,  greedy  and  ready suckers.
The  venomous  leeches  have  their  origin  in  the  de- composed urine  and  fecal  matter  of  toads  and  venom- ous fishes  in  pools  of  stagnant  and  turbid  water.  The origin  of  the  non- venomous  species  is  ascribed  to  such decomposed  vegetable  matter,  as  the  petrified  stems  of the  several  aquatic  plants  known   as   Padma,  Utpalam,
I02  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  XIII.
Nalina,  Kumuda,  Pundarika,  and  the  common  zoophytes which  live  in  clear  waters.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject.— The  non-venomous  leeches  swim  about  in  sweet scented  waters,  live  on  non-poisonous  weeds,  lie  on  the leaves  of  flowering  water  plants  instead  of  on  the  dank and  ooz)^  beds  of  pools,  and  suck  blood  from  the  affected part  of  a  human  organism  without  causing  any  discomfort.
Leeches  should  be  caught  hold  of  with  a  piece  of wet  leather,  or  by  some  similar  article,  and  then  put  in to  a  large-sized  new  pitcher  filled  with  the  water  and ooze  or  slime  of  a  pool.  Pulverised  zoophytes  and  powder of  dried  meat  and  aquatic  bulbs  should  be  thrown  into the  pitcher  for  their  food,  and  blades  of  grass  and leaves  of  water-plants  should  be  put  into  it  for  them to  lie  upon.  The  water  and  the  edibles  should  be changed  every  second  or  third  day,  and  the  pitchers should  be  changed  each  week,  (the  leeches  should  be transferred  to  a  new  pitcher  at  the  end  of  every consecutive  seven  days).
The  authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — Leeches  that  are  venomous,  thick  about  the middle,  elongated,  of  slow  locomotion,  look  fatigued, do  not  readily  take  to  the  part  they  are appHed  to,  and  capable  of  sucking  only  a  small  quantity of  blood,  should  be  looked  upon  as  not  belonging  to the  proper  or  the  commendable  type.
Chap.  XIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM,  103
Then  having  seated  or  laid  down  the  patient  'suffer- ing from  a  disease  which  requires  the  application  of leeches,  the  seat  of  bleeding,  if  not  previously  ulcerated, should  be  roughened  b}'  dusting  it  over  with  a  compo- sition of  loose  earth  and  pulverised  cowdung.  Then the  leeches  should  be  taken  out  of  their  receptacles and  sprinkled  over  with  water  saturated  with  mustard seed  and  pasted  turmeric.  Then  for  a  moment  they should  be  kept  in  a  basin  full  of  water,  and  after  they have  regained  their  natural  vivacity  and  freshness,  they should  be  applied  to  the  affected  part.  Their  bodies should  be  covered  with  a  piece  of  thin  and  wet  linen, or  with  a  piece  of  white  cotton.  The  affected  part should  be  sprinkled  over  with  drops  of  milk  or blood,  or  slight  incisions  should  be  made  into  it  in  the event  of  their  refusing  to  stick  to  the  desired  spot. Other  fresh  leeches  should  be  applied  even  when  the preceding  measures  should  prove  ineffectual.  That  the leeches  have  taken  to  the  affected  part  may  be  inferred from  the  mouths  of  the  leeches  assuming  the  shape of  a  horse-shoe,  and  the  raised  and  arched  position of  their  necks  after  they  had  become  attached  to the  seat  of  the  disease.  While  sucking,  the  leeches should  be  covered  with  a  piece  of  wet  linen  and should  be  constantly  sprinkled  over  with  cold  water.
A  sensation  of  itching  and  of  a  drawing  pain  at  the seat  of  the    application   would  give  rise  to  the  pre-
104  ^^^  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.        [Chap.  XIII.
sumption  that  fresh  blood  was  being  sucked,  and  the leeches  should  be  forthwith  removed.*
Leeches  refusing  to  fall  off  even  after  the  production of  the  desired  effect,  or  sticking  to  the  affected  part  out of  their  fondness  for  the  smell  of  blood,  should  be sprinkled  with  the  dust  of  powdered  Saindhava  (rock salt.)
After  falling  off,   the   leeches    should     be     dusted  |
over  with  rice  powder    and   their   mouths  should  be  j
lubricated  with  a  composition  of  oil  and  common  salt. Then  they  should  be  caught  by  the  tail-end  with  the thumb  and  the  forefinger  of  the  left  hand  and  their backs  should  be  gently  rubbed  with  the  same  fingers  of the  right  hand  from  tail  upward  to  the  mouth  with  a view  to  make  them  vomit  or  eject  the  full  quantity  of blood  they  had  sucked  from  the  seat  of  the  disease. The  process  should  be  continued  until  they  manifest the    fullest    symptoms   of    disgorging.     Leeches    that,  -y.^
had  vomited  the  entire  quantity  of  blood  sucked as  above,  would  briskly  move  about  in  quest  of food  if  placed  in  water,  while  the  contrary  should  be inferred  from  their  l5nng  dull  and  inert.  These should  be  made  to  disgorge  again.  Leeches  not made  to     emit    the    entire   quantity    of    the    sucked
"^  The  leeches,  though  a  blissful  dispensntion  of  Nature  in  themselves, instinctively  draw  off  the  vitiated  blood  from  a  diseased  part,  attacking  the healthy  vital  fluid  (red  blood)  \Yhen  the  former  has  been  completely  tapped or  sucked.
Chap,  XIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  105
blood  stand  in  danger  of  being  attacked*  with an  incurable  disease  peculiar  to  their  genus,  and which  is  known  as  Indramada.  The  leeches  should then  be  put  into  a  new  pitcher,  and  treated  as  before laid  down,  after  they  had  fully  emitted  the  sucked  blood.
An  ulcer  incidental  to  an  application  of  leeches should  be  rubbed  with  honey  or  washed  with  sprays of  cold  water,  or  bound  up  with  an  astringent  (kashaya) sweet  and  cooling  plaster,  according  to  the  quantity  of blood  removed  from  the  part.*
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — The  physician  who  is  fully  conversant  with the  habitat,  mode  of  catching,  preservation  and  appli- cation of  leeches,  can  well  aspire  to  cure  the  diseases which  yield  to  them  or  in  which  their  use  is  indicated.
*  In  case  of  full  and  proper  bleeding  (Voga)  the  ulcer  should  be rubbed  with  clarified  butter  technically  known  as  the  Shatadhautam  (lit: hundred  times  washed)  Ghritam  (clarified  butter),  or  a  piece  of  cotton, soaked  in  the  same  substance,  applied  as  a  compress  over  the  part. The  ulcer  should  be  rubbed  with  honey  in  a  case  of  insuflicient  bleeding, while  it  should  be  washed  with  a  copious  quantity  of  cold  water  if excessive  bleeding  (Ati-Yoga)  should  set  in.  Similarly  in  a  case  marked  by the  absence  of  any  bleeding  at  all  (Mithya-Yoga)  a  sour,  sweet  and  cooling plaster  should  be  applied  over  the  ulcer.
Thus  ends  the  thirteenth  Chapter  of  the  Sulrasthinam  in  the  Sushruta Samhita  which  treats  of  Leeches  and  of  how  and  which  to  use.
14
CHAPTER    XIV.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of blood  (Shonita-Varnaniya- mad  hya'yam).
The  food  of  a  human  being,  which  is  usually composed  of  the  five  fundamental  material  principles, admits  of  being  classified  under  four  different  heads [as,  drinks  and  edibles,  etc.].  It  has  six  different tastes  or  is  of  two  [cooling  or  heat-making]  potencies, or  consists  of  eightfold  properties,  [viz.  hot,  cool, dry,  expansive,  slimy,  mild,  sharp,  etc.]  and  of  a variety  of  other  active  or  efficacious  virtues.  The food  is  fully  digested  with  the  help  of  the  internal heat  and  ultimately  assimilated  in  the  system,  giving rise  to  lymph  chyle  (Rasa)  which  is  extremely  thin or  attenuated  in  its  consistency  and  which  forms  the essence  of  the  assimilated  food.*
The  lymph  chyle  (Rasaj,  though  running  through  the whole  organism,  has  its  primary  seat  in  the  heart,  whence it  flows  through  the  twenty- four  vessels  which  branch off  from  the  latter  (heart)  to  the  remotest  parts  and extremities  of  the  bod5\  Of  the  aforesaid  twenty-four vessels,  ten  are  up-coursing,  ten  are  down-coursing, and  four  have  a  lateral  direction.    The  Rasa   or  the
*  It  is  free  from  all  sorts  of  impurities  such  as  fecal  matter,    etc.,   and permeates  the  minutest  vessels  and  capillaries.
Chap.  XIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
107
lymph  chyle,  thus  flowing  out  of  the  heart,  constantly soothes,  maintains,  and  irrigates  b}^  transudation  the body,  and  further  contributes  to  its  growth,  and  supports life  owing  to  the  dynamical  effects  of  causes  which lie  beyond  the  ken  of  human  understanding.  The  nature and  course  of  this  lymph  chyle,  which  runs  through the  whole  system,  can  be  inferred  from  the  growth, attenuation,  or  other  modified  conditions  of  the  bod5\
Now  it  may  be  asked,  whether  the  Rasa,  which permeates  the  entire  body  and  limbs,  and  which  by flowing  through  different  chambers  (visceras)  of  the body  is  thus  in  constant  contact  with  the  excreta  and other  morbid  humours,  is  of  a  cooling  (Saum3'a)  or heat-making  (Agneya)  potency  ?
The  question  may  be  answered  by  stating  that,  since the  Rasa  or  lymph  chyle  is  a  fluid,  and  possessed of  lubricating,  vitalising,  moistening,  and  nutritive  (lit : — supporting)  properties,  it  must  be  included  within  the class  of  Saumya  (cooling)  substances.  The  Rasa,  though a  Saumya  fluid,  obtains  its  characteristic  pigment (Ragam)  in  its  passage  through  the  spleen  and  liver.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject:—The  Rasa  or  the  lymph  chyle,  coloured through  the  effect  of  the  healthy  normal  d5''eing  heat of  the  body,  obtains  the  name  of  blood.  The  Rasa is  transformed  into  the  catamenial  flow  in  women  which commences  at  the  age  of  twelve  and  ceases  at  fifty.
I08  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  XIV.
Catamenial  blood,  though  originating  from  Rasa which  is  of  a  cooling  potency^,  is  fiery  or  heat-making (Agneya)  in  its  character  ;  and  the  fecundated  or impregnated  o\'um  (Garbha)  is  both  cooling  and  heat- making  in  its  properties  on  accoimt  of  its  partaking  of the  nature  of  both  the  menstrual  blood  (ovum)  and semen  which  are  respectively  possessed  of  the  two preceding  virtues.  Hence  several  authorities  hold  the blood  to  be  identical  with  the  life  blood  or  with  the vital  principle  of  a  living  organism,  and  being  such,  to  be the  product  of  the  five  fundamental  material  principles (Panchabhautikam).
lYIctrical  texts:— In  blood  the  properties  such as,  a  raw  or  fleshy  smell,  fluidity,  redness,  lightness and  mobility,  which  respectively  characterise  the fundamental  principles  (of  earth,  water,  fire,  air,  and sky)  are  to  be  found  thus  representing  those  specific elements  in  its  composition.
The  chyle  produces  blood.  From  blood  is  formed flesh.  From  flesh  originates  fat  which  gives  rise  to bones.  From  bones  originate  marrow,  which,  in  its turn,  germinates  semen.
The  Rasa  which  is  originated  from  the  digested  or assimilated  food  and  drink  pre-eminently  strengthens all   the  fundamental  principles  of  the  body.
The  Purusha  or  self-conscious  personality  is  Chyl«-
Chap.  XIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM  109
born  in  its  origin,  and  hence  an  intelligent  person  should carefully  preserve  his  bodily  Rasa  dymph  chyle)  by adopting  a  proper  regimen  of  diet  and  conduct.
The  term  Rasa  is  derived  from  the  root  "Ras",  to go,  and  the  substance  is  so  called  from  the  fact  of  its continually  flowing  through  and  permeating  every  vital principle  of  an  animated  organism.
The  Rasa  is  successively  transformed  into  each  of  the six  remaining  fundamental  principles  of  the  body,  and continues  in  the  shape  of  each  for  the  period  of  three thousand  and  fifteen  kalas  five  days  according  to  our modern  computation  .  Thus  the  Rasa  is  converted  into semen,  or  into  the  menstrual  blood  'ovum)  in  women, in  the  course  of  a  month.*
*  The  successive  development  of  the  fundamental  or  root  principles of  the  body  follows  a  distinct  order.  The  essence  of  the  assimilated  food- matter  under  the  heat  of  digestion  goes  towards  the  formation  of  chyle, and  is  ultimately  transformed  into  it,  its  excreted  and  effete  residue  being passed  out  of  the  organism  in  the  shape  of  stool,  etc.  The  chyle  thus produced  is  called  the  immature  Rasa,  or  the  Rasa  in  its  nascent  stage. Subsequently  it  enters  into  the  bodily  principle  of  Rasa,  becomes  matured by  the  native  heat  of  the  latter,  and  is  resolved  into  three  factors,  or  in other  words,  its  excreted  matter  is  transformed  into  phlegm,  its  thick or  condensed  portion  is  transformed  into  and  assimilated  in  the  matured Rasa  of  the  bodv,  whereas  its  subtile  essence  is  metamorphosed  into blood.  The  blood,  thus  newly  generated,  is  merged  into  the  fundamental organic  principle  of  blood  ;  and  there  by  the  heat  of  the  latter it  is  again  resolved  into  three  factors,  viz.,  its  excreted  portion  is transformed  into  bile,  its  thick  or  condensed  portion  is  transformed or  assimilated  into  the  fundamental  organic  principle  of  blood,  and its  subtile  essence  is  metamorphosed  into  flesh.  The  flesh,  thus newly  formed,  is  merged  into  the  fundamental  organic  principle  of  flesh, and    there,    by   the   native   heat    of   the  latter,   it  is    resolved    into    three
I  JO  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XIV.
Authoritative  verse  on  its  com- putation:— In  the  present  work,  as  well  as  in  other works  of  recognised  authority,  a  month  is  calculated  to consist  of  eighteen  thousand  and  ninety  Kalas.
The  said  Rasa  courses  through  the  whole  body  in invisible  currents  of  zigzag  shape,  like  the  waves  of  sound, or  in  (an  upward  direction)  like  flames  of  fire,  or  (in a  downward  direction  s  like  rivulets  of  water.
factors,  vis,  its  excreted  portion  goes  towards  the  formation  of  such excreta  as  are  found  to  be  deposited  in  the  corners  of  the  eyes  and inside  the  integuments  of  the  prepuce,  or  about  the  region  of  the  glans  penis, its  thick  or  condensed  portion  is  transformed  into  the  organic  principle of  flesh  and  its  subtile  essence  is  metamorphosed  into  fat.  The  fat, thus  newly  generated,  enters  into  the  organic  principle  ',of  that  name,  and there,  by  the  native  heat  of  the  latter,  is  resolved  into  three  factors, ?7-,  its  excreted  portion  is  discharged  through  the  pores  of  the  skin  in drops  of  perspiration,  its  condensed  portion  is  assimilated  in  the  organic principle  of  fat,  and  its  subtile  portion  is  metamorphosed  into  bone. Again  the  bone,  in  its  nascent  stage,  enters  into  the  organic  principle of  bone,  and  there,  by  the  inherent  heat  of  that  principle,  is  resolved  into three  factors,  v!~,  its  excreted  portion  goes  towards  the  formation  of  hairs, mustaches,  etc,  its  thick  or  condensed  portion  is  assimilated  into  the organic  principle  of  bone,  and  its  subtile  portion  is  metamorphosed  into marrow.  The  marrow,  in  its  nascent  state,  enters  into  the  organic principle  of  that  name  ;  and  there  matured  under  the  native  heat  of that  principle,  it  is  resolved  into  three  factors,  vh,  its  excreted  portion contributes  towards  the  formation  of  gelatinous  matter  deposited  in  the corners  of  the  eyes,  and  the  oily  secretions  of  the  skin,  its  condensed  portion is  assimilated  into  the  organic  principle  of  marrow,  and  its  subtile  portion is  metamorphosed  into  semen.  The  semen  again,  in  its  nascent  stage, enters  into  the  organic  principle  of  that  name  and  there  matured  under its  native  heat  is  resolved  into  two  factors,  I'i:.  thick  and  thin.  The  thick portion  is  assimilated  into  the  organic  principle  of  semen,  the  thin  one  being metamorphosed  into  (albumen).  Semen,  like  gold  a  thousand  times  purified, casts  off  no  dregs.  Hence  certain  authorities  hold  albumen  (protoplasmic matter)  to  be  the  eighth  or  the  culminating  principle  of  the  body.
Chap.  XIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 1 1
Now  it  may  be  asked,  since  the  Rasa  is  naturally transformed  into  semen  in  .the  course  of  a  month,  what is  the  use  of  administering  medicine  which  has  a stimulating  effect  upon  the  organs  of  generation (Vajikaranam.)  The  answer  is,  that  such  medicines  out of  their  own  specific  potencies  and  virtue  help  the speedy  conversion  of  Rasa  into  semen  and  its  profuse emission  [on  the  desired  occasion]  like  purgatives  aiding the  drastic  evacuation  of  the  bowels.
Again  it  may  be  asked,  how  is  it,  that  semen is  not  found  in  an  infant  ?  Since  perfume  in  a  flower- bud  is  imperceptible  to  the  organ  of  smell  you  may as  well  ask  whether  there  is  any  perfume  in  it  or  not. But  what  does  not  exist  in  a  thing  can  not  be  evoked in  the  subsequent  course  of  its  development.  As  the perfume  in  a  flower-bud  lies  latent  in  its  earl}^  stage of  growth  but  becomes  patent  only  with  the  growth of  its  seed  organs,  so  semen  or  catamenial  blood lies  in  a  potential  state  in  a  male  or  a  female child,  and  appears  with  the  growth  of  beards  and mustaches,  or  with  the  enlargement  of  the  breasts, uterus  and  vaginal  canal  and  the  appearance  of  pubic hair.
The  same  Rasa,  originated  from  the  assimilated  food, serves  only  to  maintain  the  vitality  in  the  old  and spontaneously  decayed  subjects  owing  to  an  exhausted state  of  the  inner  vitalising  principle,  natural  to  old  age.
112  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        : Chap.  XIV.
The  abovesaid  principles  (of  Rasa,  blood  etc.)  are  called the  root  principles  (Dhatus),  inasmuch  as  they  maintain the  integrity  of  the  human  organism  and  guard against  its  speedy  dissolution).  And  since  the  strength or  weakness  of  the  abovesaid  bodily  principles absolutely  depends  upon  the  richness  or  poverty  of  blood, we  shall  discourse  on  the  latter  condition  of  the  blood.
The  blood,  vitiated  by  the  deranged  bodily  wind (Vayu),  becomes  thin,  frothy,  transparent,  quick- coursing, and  expansive,  assumes  a  vermilion  or  black  hue, and  is  divested  of  its  slimy  character  ;  whereas  vitiated through  a  deranged  condition  of  the  bile  (Pittam),  it assumes  a  blue,  yellow,  green,  or  brown  colour,  emits  a fishy  smell,  becomes  thin  in  its  consistency  and  is  shun by  flies  and  ants.  Similarly,  blood,  vitiated  by  the deranged  phlegm  (Kapham),  becomes  cold,  glossy  and thick,  assumes  a  colour  like  that  of  the  washings  of Gairika  or  that  of  a  flesh  tendon,  takes  time  in  secreting or  in  mnning  down,  and  is  marked  by  an  increase  of  its slimy  character.  The  blood,  vitiated  through  a  concert- ed derangement  of  the  three  bodily  humours,  is  marked by  features  peculiar  to  each  of  them,  and  assumes  a colour  like  that  of  Kanjika  (sour  gruel),  and  emits  a fetid  smell.  Similarly,  the  blood,  vitiated  through the  joint  action  of  any  two  of  the  (beforesaid)  bodily humours,  is  characterised  by  features  peculiar  to  each of  them.
Cain  .  XIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
113
The  blood  in  its  healthy  and  natural  state  is  possess- ed of  a  vivid  red  colour  like  that  of  an  Indragopa (Cochineal)  insect,  and  is  neither  too  thin  nor  too transparent.*
Cases  where  blood-letting  is  pro- hibited : — A  person  afflicted  with  an  oedematous swelling  extending  all  over  the  body  should  be  deemed unfit  for  bleeding.  An  intumescence  occurring  in  a  weak and  enfeebled  patient  owing  to  an  excessive  use  of acid  food  or  in  a  person  suffering  from  jaundice  or  laid up  with  haemorrhoids  or  abdominal  dropsy,  as  well  as in  an  enceinte,  or  in  a  person  suffering  from  Pulmonary consumption  (Shosha),  should  not  be  bled.
Blood-letting,  with  the  help  of  a  surgical  instrument, may  be  grouped  under  two  distinct  heads,  according as  scarification  (Prachchhanam)  or  venesection  (Sira- Vyadhanam)  is  resorted  to  for  the  purpose.  In  such  a case  the  knife  or  the  instrument  (Shastram)  should  be driven  straight  and  speedily  so  as  to  make  the  incision straight,  narrow,  unextended,  and  of  equal  and  slight depth  throughout,  (so  as  to  reach  only  the  surface layer  of  the  flesh  and  blood),  and  not  to  injure  in  any way  the  local  veins,  nerves,  joints,  and  other  vital  parts.
Bleeding  performed  on  a  cloudy  day  or  done  with  a
*  Additional  texts  : — Later  on  we  shall  have  occasion  to  speak  of the  principles  known  as  the  life-blood  (essential  conditions  of  vitality — Sk.  Jiva-Shonita)  and  of  the  process  of  blood-letting.
15
114  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  Xiv
wrong  incision,  or  with  full  exposure  to  cold  and  wind, or  performed  on  a  patient  not  previously  diaphorised, or  on  a  patient  with  an  empty  stomach,  is  attended .  with  little  or  no  outflow  of  blood  owing  to  the  thickened condition  of  the  blood.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — Blood-letting  surgically  performed  on  a  fatigued or  exhausted  subject,  or  on  a  person  in  a  swoon, or  anyway  poisoned  or  intoxicated,  or  on  a  person suffering  from  extreme  constipation  of  the  bowels  accom- panied by  suppression  of  the  flatus  i  Vayu)  and  urine,  or on  a  person  of  timid  disposition,  or  on  one  overcome  with sleep,  is  marked  by  the  absence  of  any  outflow  of  blood.
The  vitiated  blood,  failing  to  find  out  an  outlet,  gives rise  to  itching,  swelling,  redness,  burning,  suppuration and  pain  in  the  part  (to  which  it  is  confined). On  the  contrary,  blood-letting  performed  on  the  body of  a  person  excessively  diaphorised  or  heated,  or  by an  ignorant  or  inexperienced  surgeon,  or  with  an injudiciously  deep  incision,  is  attended  with  haemorrhage, which  may  be  followed  by  such  dreadful  results  as Shirobhitapa  or  violent  headache,  blindness  or  loss  of sight  (Timria,  Adhimantham  (ophthalmia^  loss  of  vital principles  of  the  body  (Dhatu-Kshaya),  convulsions, paralysis  (Ekanga  Vikara),  Hemiplegia  (Pakshaghata), thirst,  a  burning  sensation,  hic-cough,  cough,  asthma, jaundice  and  even  death.
Chap.  XIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  n^
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — Therefore  blood-Jetting  should  be  performed on  a  patient  not  in  an  extremly  hot  or  cold  season, neither  on  one  who  is  too  much  heated  or  im- properly diaphorised  (before  the  act).  The  patient should  be  given  gruel  ( Yavagu)  before  the  operation. A   spontaneous  cessation    of  red   flow  would    indicate
that  there  has  been  a  free  discharge  of  blood. » An  act  of  complete   and   successful   blood-letting  is
followed  b}'  a  feeling  of  lightness  and  alleviation  of  pain
in  the   affected   part,   by   an  abatement  of  the  disease,
and  a  general  sense  of  cheerfulness.
A  person,  accustomed  to  blood  letting,  enjoys  a  kind of  immunity  from  all  types  of  skin  diseases,  sarcomata, aneurism,  oedema,  and  diseases  brought  about  by  a vitiated  condition  of  the  blood  such  as,  Ovarian  tumour, Carbuncle,  Erysipelas,  etc.
A  plaster  composed  of  Ela,  Shitashiva,  Kustha, Tagara,  Patha,  Agaradhuma,  Bhadradaru,  Vidanga, Chitraka,  Trikatus,  Ankura,  Haridra,  Arka,  and  Nakta- mala,  or  three,  or  four,  or  as  many  of  them  as are  available,  pasted  together  and  soaked  in  mustard  oil saturated  with  common  salt,  should  be  rubbed  over the  mouth  of  the  incision.  By  this  means  the  blood  will fully  come  out.  In  a  case  of  excessive  flow  or  hcem- orrhage,  the  mouth  of  the  incision  should  be  gently  rubbed with  a  composition  consisting  of  the  powders  of  Lodhra,
Il6  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  Xiv.
Priyangii,  Madhiika,  Pattanga,  Gairika,  Sarjarasa, Rasanjana,  Shalmali  flowers,  Shankha,  Shukti,  Masha, Yava  and  Godhuma,  and  firmly  pressed  with  the  tips  of the  fingers.  As  an  alternative,  the  mouth  of  the  incision should  be  gently  rubbed  with  the  powdered  barks  of Sdla,  Sarja,  Arjuna,  Arimeda,  Mesha-shringi,  and Dhanvana,  or  the  edges  of  the  wound  should  be  lightly dusted  with  the  burnt  ashes  of  a  silk  cord  (a  piece  of  silk rolled  up  in  the  form  of  a  cord},  and  firmly  pressed with  the  tips  of  the  fingers  ;  or  the  mouth  of  the wound  should  be  lightly  touched  with  the  powders  of Laksha  and  Samudra-phena,  and  its  edges  should  be similarly  pressed  together  as  above.  Then  the  wound should  be  firmly  tied  up  (with  a  piece  of  silk  or linen;  plastered  over  with  a  paste  of  the  substances mentioned  in  connection  with  the  bandaging  of  ulcers (Vrana).  The  patient  should  be  kept  in  a  cool room,  covered  over  with  a  wet  sheet  and  constantly soothed  with  sprays  of  cold  water.  A  medicinal  plaster of  a  cooling  virtue  and  a  course  of  cooling  diet  should  be prescribed  for  him.  The  wound  should  be  cauterised with  fire  or  an  alkali,  or  the  vein  should  be  again opened  at  a  point  a  little  below  the  seat  of  the first  incision  in  case  where  the  abovesaid  measures should  have  failed  to  check  the  flow  of  blood.  The -patient  should  be  made  to  drink  a  decoction  compound  of drugs  of  the  Kakolyadi  group,  sweetened  with  sugar  or honey  ;  and   his   ordinary'   drink   should  consist  of  the
[Chap.  XIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  II7
blood  of  the  Ena  or  common  deer,  or  of  a  sheep,  hare, or  buffalo.  A  diet  composed  of  boiled  rice,  soaked in  or  saturated  with  clarified  butter,  should  be  pres- cribed, and  the  complications  should  be  subdued according  to  the  nature  of  the  deranged  bodily humours  respectively  involved  therein.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject:— Excessive  blood-letting  is  followed  b}'  im^paired appetite  and  an  agitated  condition  of  the  vital  Vayu owing  to  the  loss  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the body,  and,  accordingly,  to  recoup  the  health  of  the the  patient  a  course  of  diet  should  be  prescribed which  is  light  and  not  excessively  heat-making,  and which  contains  a  fair  amount  of  emollient  and  blood- making  matter,  and  is  marked  by  Kttle  or  no  acid  taste.
The  four  measures  indicated  for  the  stoppage  of bleeding  are  known  ;  as  the  Sandhanam  (process by  contracting  the  affected  part),  the  Skandanam (thickening  or  congealing  the  local  blood),  the Pachanam  (process  of  setting  up  suppuration  in  the wound)  and  the  Dahanam  (process  of  cauterisation).
Drugs  of  astringent  tastes  are  possessed  of  the property  of  bringing  about  an  adhesion  (contraction)  of the  wound.  Cooling  measures  such  as,  applications  of ice  etc,  tend  to  thicken  the  local  blood  ;  alkalis  and alkaline    preparations  produce  suppuration    in    such  a
Il8  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XIV.
woimci  or  ulcer,  whereas  cauterisation  has   the  property of  .contracting  a  vein.
Remedies  and  appHances  possessed  of  the  virtue  of bringing  about  an  adhesion  of  such  a  wound  should  be used  where  applications  for  thickening  or  congealing the  local  blood  would  fail  ;  whereas  the  suppurating measures  should  be  adopted  in  the  event  of  the former  (Sandhanam)  proving  ineffectual.  With  any  of  the three  of  these  preceding  measures  a  physician  should  try to  check  the  outflow  of  blood  incidental  to  an  operation of  bleeding,  and  lastly  the  process  of  cauterisation should  be  resorted  to  in  the  event  of  the  preceding ones  having  pro^-ed  unavailing,  as  it  is  pre-eminently the  best  means  of  checking  the  bleeding.
The  least  residue  of  the  vitiated  blood  continuing in  the  affected  part  may  not  aggi-avate  the  disease but  prevent  its  perfect  healing.  In  such  a  case  bleed- ing should  not  be  again  resorted  to,  but  the  derang- ed residue  should  be  subdued  by  means  of  pacifying  or absorbing  remedies.
Blood  is  the  origin  of  the  body.  It  is  blood  that maintains  vitality.  Blood  is  life.  Hence  it  should  be preserved  with  the  greatest  care.
The  Vayu  of  a  person  who  has  been  bled,  and which  has  been  aggravated  by  constant  cold  applications
Chap.  XIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  119
may  give  rise  to  a  swelling  of  the  incised*  part characterised  by  a  piercing  pain,  which  should  be treated  with  an  unguent  of  tepid  clarified  butter.
Thus  ends  the  fourteenlh  Chapter  of   the  Sutrasthan^m  in   the    Sushrula Samhit^  which  treats  of  Blood.
CHAPTER    XV.
Now  we  shall  describe  the  Chapter  which treats  of  development  and  non-deA'elopment  of  the humoral  constituents .  of  the  body  and  excrements (Dosha- Dhai:u-IVIaIa- Kshaya-Vriddhi - Vijnaniya-madhya^am).
Since  the  human  body  is  constituted  of  humours, (Doshas),  excretions  (Mala\  and  the  fimdamental  princi- ples (Dhatus.  of  blood,  marrow,  etc.,  hear  me  discourse on  the  features  which  are  peculiar  to  each  of  them.
The  Vayu. — The  imparting  of  motion  to  the body  :  Praspandanam;,  the  carrsing  of  the  sensations  of the  respective  sense  organs  (Udvahanam',  the  passing down  of  food  to  its  proper  receptacles  (Puranam),  the separation  of  excretions  from  the  assimilated  food  matter (,Viveka  ,  and  the  retention  and  evacuation  of  urine  and semen,  etc.  (Dharanam'  should  be  ascribed  to  the fimctions  of  the  five  kinds*  of  Vayu  inerve  forcei which  support  the  body.
The  Pittam. — Pigmentations  or  coloiu-ing (Ragakrit),  the  digestion  of  food  and  metabolism  of tissues  (Paktikrit),  the  vitalisation  and  nutrition  of  the protaplasmic  cells  (Ojakrit),  the  origination   and  preser-
*  They  are  called  Pr^na,  Ud<ina,  Samdna,  \'y^na  and  Apina.
Chap.  XV.  ]  SUTR ASTHANAM .  1 2  i
vation  of  eye-sight  (Teja-Krit),  the  germination  df  heat and  maintenance  of  the  temperature  of  the  body  (Ushma- Krit),  and  the  origination  of  the  faculty  of  intellection (Medha-Krit)  should  be  regarded  as  the  functions  of the  five  kinds*  of  Pittam,  which  contribute  to  the preservation  of  the  body  through  its  thermogenetic potency  (Agni-Karma).
The  Shieshma'.— The  function  of  the  five kindsf  of  Shieshma  is  to  lubricate  the  interior  of  the joints  (Sandhi-Samshleshanam),  to  contribute  to  the gloss  of  the  body  (Snehanam),  to  aid  in  the  formation of  healthy  granules  in  sores  (Ropanam),  to  add  to  the size  of  the  body  (Puranam',  to  build  fresh  tissues (Vrimhanam),  to  impart  a  pleasant  or  soothing  sensation to  the  body  (Tarpanam),  to  increase  its  strength ' Valakrit ,  and  to  give  firmness  to  the  limbs  'Sthairya- krit),  thereby  contributing  to  the  welfare  of  the  body by  supplying  it  with  its  watery  element.
The  Rasa  or  the  lymph  chyle  exercises  a soothing  effect   upon   the    entire   organism  and    tends
*  They  are  named  as  Ranjaka.  P^chaka,  SSdhaka  (Medh^krit  and Ojakrit),  Alochaka  and  BhrSjaka.
t  They  are  known  as  Shleshmaka,  Kledaka,  Vodhaka,  Tarpaka, Avalamvaka.
A^.  B, — The  V^yu,  Pittam,  andShleshmS,  (Kaphham),  though  ordinarily translated  as  wind,  bile  and  phlegm,  differ  in  their  meaning  from  their usual  English  synonyms.  We  reserve  the  treatment  of  these  subjects  for a  separate  place  in  another  part  of  the  book  when  we  shall  have occasion  to  deal  with  the  essentials  of  Ayurvedic  Physiology — Tr. i6
122  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.       [Chap.  XV.
to  contribute  to  the  increased  formation  of  blood. The  blood,  in  its  turn,  increases  the  healthful  glow of  the  complexion,  leads  to  the  increased  formation  of flesh  and  muscles  and  maintains  vitalit}-  in  the  organism. The  flesh  contributes  towards  the  stoutness  or  rotundity of  the  limbs  and  occasions  the  formation  of  fatty matter  in  the  system.  The  fat  gives  rise  to  the glossiness  (formation  of  oily  or  albuminous  matter)  of the  body  and  primarily  contributes  towards  the  firm- ness and  growth  of  the  bones.  The  bones,  in  their turn,  support  the  body,  and  contribute  to  the  formation of  marrow.  The  marrow  contributes  towards  the  for- mation and  increase  of  semen,  and  fills  in  the  internal canities  of  the  bones,  and  fomis  the  chief  soiu"ce  of strength,  amorous  feelings  and  hilarity.  The  semen  gives rise  to  valour  and  courageousness,  makes  a  man  amor- ously disposed  towards  the  female  sex,  increases  his strength  and  amativeness,  is  the  sole  impregnating principle  in  the  male  organism,  and  is  possessed  of  the virtue  of  being  quickly  emitted.
The  excreta  or  the  fecal  matters  of  a  man  are  in- dispensably necessary  for  the  preser\^ation  of  the  body. They  contain  the  wind  and  digestion  .being  primarily connected  with  the  movements  of  the  bodily  Vayu  and the  feeling  of  hunger).  The  urine  fills  the  receptacle  of the  bladder,  and  is  possessed  of  the  property  of  washing or  draining  off  the  waste  or  refuse  matter  of  the  organism  ; whereas  perspiration  tends  to  moisten  the  skin.
Chap.  XV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
123
The  Artavam  (menstrual  blood)  is  endued  with  the same  properties  as  its  arterial  namesake,  and  is  one  of  the essential  factors  in  a  woman  which  makes  impregnation possible.  The  foetus  or  impregnated  matter  (Garbha) serves  to  make  patent  the  features  characteristic  of pregnancy.  The  breast-milk  in  its  turn  tends  to bring  about  an  expansion  of  the  mammae  lof  a woman  ,  and  maintains  the  life  of  her  child  (by suppl}'ing  it  with  the  necessary  and  nutritive  element of  food).  These  Vayu,  etc.  should  be  duly  preserved in  their  normal  condition.
Now  we  shall  describe  the  symptoms  which attend  the  loss  or  waste  of  any  of  the  foregoing principles  of  the  body.*
The  loss  of  the  bodily  Vayu  f nerve-force)  is  followed bv  a  state  of  languor,  shortness  of  speech,  uneasiness or  absence  of  hilarity,  and  loss  of  consciousness.  The loss  of  fPittam)  is  marked  b}'  a  dulness  of  complexion, diminution  of  the  bodily  heat  and  an  impaired  state of  internal  fire  (digestive  heat).  The  loss  of  phlegm (Kapham)  is  marked  by  dryness,  a  sensation  of  internal burning,  a  feeling  of  emptiness  in  the  stomach  and  other
*  Such  a  loss  or  perceptible  deterioration  of  any  of  them  should  be ascribed  to  the  use  of  exce^^sive  cleansing  or  cathartic  (Samshodhanam)  and pacifying  (Samshamanam)  measures,  or  to  a  repression  of  the  natural urgings  of  the  body,  or  to  a  course  of  violent  or  overfatiguing  physical exercise,  or  to  amorous  excesses,  or  to  the  use  of  unwholesome  and unsuitable  food,  or  ta  grief,  etc.
124  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XV.
cavities  or  chambers  of  the  body,  looseness  of  the  joints (a  feeling  as  if  the  joints  were  all  broken),  thirst,  weak- ness, and  insomnia.  In  such  cases  the  medical  treatment should  consist  of  remedial  agents  which  are  capable of  directly  contributing  to  the  growth  or  formation of  the  humour  so  lost  or  deteriorated.
Similarly  the   loss  of  lymph    chyle  is  marked  by
pain    about   the   region   of  the  heart,  Angina  Pectoris,
with      palpitation     of    the      heart,     a     sensation     of
emptiness    or   gone-feeling   in   the   viscus,   and    thirst.
The  loss  of  blood  is  attended   with   such   symptoms   as
roughness   of  the   skin,   and   a   craving   for   acid   food
or  drink.     The   patient   longs   to   be   in   a   cool   place
and  asks  for  cool  things,    and   the    veins   become   loose
and  flabby.     The  loss  of  flesh  is   marked  by  emaciation
of  the  buttocks,  cheeks,   lips,   thighs,   breasts,  armpits,*
neck,  and  the  calves  of  the   legs.     The  arteries   seem
loose   and   flabby,    and   the  body    seems  to  be  dry  and
inert,     accompanied   by   an   aching  or    gnawing    pam
in  its  members.     The  loss  of  fat   is   followed   by   such
symptoms.as  the  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  a  sense  of
emptiness  in  the  joints,  and   a   peculiar   dryness   of  the
skin   and   a  craving  for  cold   and  emollient    meat.    The
degeneration  of  the  bones  is  marked  by  an  aching  pain
in   the   bones   and  bone-joints,  a  wasting  of  teeth  and
ffums,  and  a  general    drvness   of  the   body.     Similarly,  .
*  The  armpits  look  thin,  narrow  and  contracledt
Chap.  XV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  125
the  loss  or  waste  of  marrow  is  characterised  by  the  for- mation of  a  lesser  quantity  of  semen,  aching  pain  in  the bones  and  breaking  pain  in  the  bone-joints  which  have become  marrowless.  The  loss  or  waste  of  semen  is  mark- ed by  pain  in  the  penis  and  the  testes,  and  by  incapacity for  sexual  intercourse.  In  such  cases  the  emission  of  semen but  rarely  happens,  and  is  then  perceptibly  deficient  in  its quantity,  the  emitted  matter  consisting  of  a  small  quantity of  sehien  marked  with  shreds  of  blood.  The  medical  treat- ment under  the  preceding  circumstances  should  consist of  remedies  of  such  medicinal  virtues  as  are  found  to directly  and  immediately  contribute  to  the  formation of  the  bodily  principle  (thus  wasted  or  lost).
The  loss  absence,  suppression  or  scanty  forma- tion of  fecal  matter  is  attended  with  a  sensation of  pain  at  the  sides  and  the  region  of  the  heart, and  the  upward  coursing  of  (the  incarcerated)  wind or  flatus,  accompanied  with  a  rumbling  sound about  the  region  of  the  liver  and  the  intestines. Similarly,  the  loss,  absence  or  scanty  formation)  of urine  is  marked  by  an  aching  pain  in  the  bladder,  causing it  dribble  or  to  come  out  in  thin  and  scanty  jets.  Here, as  in  the  foregoing  instances,  the  remedial  agents should  consist  of  drugs  which  directly  contribute  to the  formation  of  urine.  Similarly  the  waste,  absence  or scanty  formation  of  perspiration  is  followed  by  such symptoms  as  numbness  about  the  pores  of  the  hair,   and
126  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  XV.
dryness  of  the  epidermis  (skin\  The  sense  of  touch  is perceptibly  affected,  and  perspiration  is  entirely  stopped. The  medical  treatment  in  such  a  case  consists  in the  application  of  medicated  unguents,  lubrications, diaphoretics,  and  adoption  of  measures  (that  tend  to produce  a  copious  perspiration\
In  the  case  of  loss  or  waste  of  the  catamenial flow,  the  menses  do  not  appear  at  the  appointed time  or  are  scant}'.  The  vagina  seems  stuffed  and painful.  The  medical  treatment  in  such  cases  consists  in the  adoption  of  alterative  or  cleansing  measures,  and  in the  administration  of  drugs  of  a  heat-making  (Agneya) potency  or  virtue.
The  loss  or  waste  of  breast-milk  is  characterised  by a  shrunken  condition  of  the  mammae,  and  suppression  or scanty  secretion  of  the  fluid.  The  medical  treatment in  such  cases  lies  in  the  administration  of  drugs  which generate  Kapham.
The  atrophy  or  wasting  of  the  foetus  in  the  womb (during  the  period  of  gestation)  is  marked  by  the absence  of  any  movement  in  the  uterus  and  the  non- distended  condition  of  the  sides  or  walls  of  the  abdomen. The  treatment  consists  in  the  application  of  Kshira Vastis  (enemas  of  medicated  milk  into  the  region  of  the utenis)  in  the  eighth  month  of  gestation,  and  prescribing courses  of  emollient  fare  for  the  patient  mother)*
*  Several  editions  read  invigorating  diets,  egg,  etc.
Chap.  XV.]  SUTRASTHANAM.
127
Now  we  shall  describe  the  symptoms  which  mark the  excess  (excessive  accumulation  in  the  body  >  of  any of  the  fundamental  humours,  ]>rinciples  and  excrements of  the  body.
The  quantities  of  these  humours,  principles  and secretion,  are  abnormally  increased  through  the  use  of substances  that  primarily  contribute  to  their  formation in  the  organism.*
An  excess  of  Vayu  in  the  body  is  marked  by  such symptoms  as  roughness  of  the  skin,  t  emaciation  of  the body,  darkness  of  complexion  flit :  blackness  of  hue),  a little  tremor  or  trembling  of  the  limbs,  longing  for heat,  or  for  hot  things,  insomnia,  thickness  or  increased consistency  of  the  fecal  matter  and  decrease  of  bodily strength.  (Similarly,  an  abnormal)  increase  of  Pittam is  characterised  by  a  sallow  complexion  or  a yellowish  colour  of  the  skin,  a  general  burning  sensation in  the  body  as  well  as  insomnia,  a  craving  for  cold contacts  and  cooling  things,  diminution  of  strength, weakness  of  the  sense  organs,  fits  of  fainting  and yellowness  of  the  conjunctivae,  stool  and  urine.
An  excess  of  Kapham  in  the  body  is  marked by  such  symptoms,  as  the  whiteness,  coldness  and numbness   of  the     body,   heaviness     of  the   limbs,     a
*  Several  Editions  read  it  as  an  additional  text. +  Several  Editions  read  roughness  of  speech.
128  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XV.
sense   of  drowsiness   and   languor_,   somnolence,  and  a feeling  of  looseness  of  the  bone-joints.
Similarl}',  an  increased  germination  of  lymph  chyle (Rasa)  in  the  body  is  manifest  by  such  characteristics as,  nausea,  water-brash,  and  an  increased  flow  of  salivary secretion.  A  plethora  of  blood  in  the  system  gives  a reddish  glow  to  the  complexion  and  the  white  of  the eyes,  and  imparts  fullness  to  the  veins.  An  increase  of flesh  is  marked  by  the  rotundit}"  and  fullness  of  the buttocks  and  the  lips,  as  well  as  of  the  penis,  arms,  and the  thighs,  and  an  increased  heaviness  of  the  whole  body. An  excess  of  fat  in  the  body  imparts  an  oily  gloss  to  the skin.  The  sides  of  the  abdomen  are  increased  in  bulk, and  the  body  emits  a  fetid  smell,  and  the  person  is assailed  with  cough  and  dyspnoea.  An  excessive  forma- tion of  bone  (abnormal  ossification)  is  attended  with  such symptoms  as  the  cutting  of  additional  teeth  and  the abnormal  development  of  any  of  the  bone-structures.  An excessive  formation  of  marrow  gives  rise  to  a  heaviness of  the  eyes  and  to  the  members  of  the  body.
An  excess  of  semen  in  the  body  is  marked  b}'  an  ex- cessive flow  of  that  fluid  and  gives  rise  to  the  fomiation of  gravels  (concretions)  in  the  bladder  which  are  known as  Shukrashmari.  An  abnormal  increase  in  the  forma- tion of  fecal  matter  is  attended  with  distension  of  the abdomen  and  colic  pains  in  the  loins  and  the  intestines. An  excessive  formation  of  urine  is  manifest  by  constant
Chap.  XV.  SUTRASTHANAM.  129
urging   for  micturition   and   distension   of  the  bladder, attended  by  a  kind  of  gnawing  or  aching  pain.
Similarly,  an  increased  secretion  of  perspiration  is attended  with  an  itching  of  the  skin  which  emits  a  bad odour.  An  excess  in  the  quantity  of  catamenial  blood* gives  rise  to  an  aching  of  the  limbs  and  an  excessive  flow. So  also  an  excess  in  the  quantity  of  the  breast-milk  is attended  with  frequent  secretions  of  that  fluid,  and  with inflaihmation  and  pain  in  the  mammae.  An  excessive growth  of  the  faetus  in  the  uterus  tends  to  abnomially swell  .the  region  of  the  abdomen,  and  is  accompanied by  anasarca,  or  dropsy,  of  the  lower  extremities (phlegmasia  dolens;.
These  abnormal  excesses  of  the  aforesaid  humours and  principles,  etc.  of  the  body  should  be  checked  or remedied  with  corrective  (cleansing)  or  pacifying measures  as  would  be  indicated  by  their  respective natures,  so  as  not  to  reduce  them  to  a  smaller  quantity than  that  in  which  they  are  found  in  the  normal  and healthy  state  of  a  body.
IVIetrical  text : — An  increased  quantity  of  a bodily  principle  gives  rise  to  a  similar  increase  in  the quantity  of  one  immediately  succeeding  it  in  the order  of  enumeration  as   stated   above  ;   aud   hence   an
*  An  abnormal  flow  tends  to  stimulate  the  voluptuous  sensation  of  a woman  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  is  followed  by  a  sense  of  reactionary weakness.   Il  emits  a  fetid  smell  and  originates  ovarian  tumours.
17
130
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XV.
increase  in  any  of  the  fundamental  principles  of  the body  should  be  checked  and  reduced  to  its  normal quantity.
Now  we  shall  describe  the  characteristic  features of  the  strength-giving  principles  of  the  body,  as  well as  the  symptoms  that  mark  their  loss  or  waste.  The quintessence  of  all  the  fundamental  principles  of the  body,  starting  with  lymph  chyle  and  ending  with semen,  is  called  the  Ojas,  which  is  identical  with  what is  termed  "vital  power."  This  view  of  oneness  of vitality  with  protoplasmic  albumen  has  been  adopted in  the  present  work*
This  Ojas  (albumen)  or  strength-giving  principle serves  to  impart  a  firm  integrity  to  the  flesh  (and  the muscles),  exercises  unbounded  control  over  all  acts  of vitality,  improves  the  voice  and  complexion,  and helps  both  the  external  (operative")  and  the  internal ^intellectual)  sense  organs,  in  duly  performing  their natural  functions.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject:— Ojas  (albumen  being  of  a  white  colour  belongs to     the     class     of    Somatmakam  (cooling)    substances.
*  The  Sanskrit  lerm  "Ojas"'  has  a  variety  of  meanings.  Primarily it  means  protoplasmic  matter  as  found  in  cells  (Vindus).  Secondarily it  means  albumen  as  we  shall  describe  later  on  in  the  chapters  on etiology  and  therapeutics  of  Prameha.  Several  authorities  hold  a  contrary view  staling  that  Ojas  (albumen)  forms  only  one  of  the  essentials  of vitality  and  that  the  two  are  by  no  means  identical.
Chap.  XV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  131
It  is  cooling,  oleaginous,  and  firm  (Sthira),  contributes  to the  formation  and  growth -of  flesh,  maintains  its  integrity or  holds  it  firm,  and  is  mobile  or  capable  of  moving  about from  one  place  to  another  within  the  organism.  * It  is  further  soft  and  shiny,  and  is  possessed  of  the  most efficacious  virtue  and  should  be  regarded  as  the  most important  element  (seat)  of  vitality.  The  whole  body with  its  limbs  and  members  is  permeated  with  Ojas, and  a  loss  or  diminution  in  its  natural  quantity  leads to  the  gradual  emaciation  (and  ultimate  dissolution)  of organism.
A  blow,  a  persistent  wasting  disease,  anger,  grief, cares  and  anxieties,  fatigue  and  hunger,  are  the  causes  to which  should  be  ascribed  the  wasting  or  disappearance of  this  strength-giving  principle  (albumen)  of  the  body. The  bodily  albumen,  through  the  agency  of  the  above- said  causes,  is  wasted  through  the  channels  carrying  the different  fundamental  principles  of  the  body.  Albumen  is transformed  into  strength  which  radiates  from  the  heart.
A  deranged  or  vitiated  albumen  (Ojas)  is  characterised firstly  by  its  dislodgment  from  its  proper  seat  or  locality (Visransha),  secondly,  by  a  change  or  modification  of  its native  virtues  in  contact  with  the  deranged  humours or  disordered  organs  (Vyapad)  and  thiidly,  by  wasting away  (Kshaya\
*  Several  editions  read  Rasam,  meaning  it    to   be  possessed  of  a  sweet taste.
132  THE    SUSHRUTA    SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XV.
The  first  of  the  preceding  properties  (dislodgment) gives  rise  to  such  symptoms  as  looseness  of  the bone-joints,  numbness  of  the  hmbs,  dislodgment  of the  deranged  humours  from  their  respective  recep- tacles and  suppression  of  the  (bodily  and  intellectual) functions.  To  the  second  of  the  foregoing  properties, (change  or  modification  of  its  natural  virtue  through contact  with  the  deranged  bodily  humours  etc)  should  be ascribed  such  symptoms,  as  numbness  and  heaviness  of the  limbs,  dropsy  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged bodily  Vayu,  discoloured  or  changed  complexion,  feeling of  malaise,  drowsiness  and  somnolence.  The  third  pro- perty of  the  deranged  albumen,  loss  or  wasting),  brings on  fits  of  fainting,  loss  of  flesh,  stupor,  delirium  and ultimately  death.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject:—A  deranged  state  of  albumen  is  marked by  the  three  abovesaid  properties  of  dislodgment from  its  proper  seat  (Visransha)  ;  by  a  change  of  its natural  virtues  through  contamination  (Vyapadi  and by  wasting  (Kshaya .  The  first  of  these  properties (Visransha)  is  characterised  by  looseness  of  the  joints, by  an  inert  state  of  the  body,  by  a  sense  of  fatigue, by  a  dislodgment  of  the  deranged  humours  from  their natural  seats,  and  by  a  suppression  of  the  bodily  and intellectual  functions.  Numbness  and  heaviness  of the  limbs,  malaise,  a  discoloured  complexion,  drowsiness,
Chap.  XV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  133
somnolence  and  dropsical  swelling  brought  about  by a  deranged  state  ot  t\\e  bodily  Vayu,  should  be considered  as  natural  consequences  of  the  Vyapad ^change  of  the  natural  virtues  of  albumen  through contamination).  The  loss  or  waste  of  Ojah  (albumen)  is marked  by  such  symptoms  as  fits  of  fainting, emaciation  of  the  body,  bewilderment  and  distraction of  the  mind,  delirium  and  loss  of  consciousness  and ultim?itely  death.
The  medical  treatment  in  cases  of  dislodgment  or flowing  out  external  secretion)  of  albumen  from  its natural  seat  (Visransha),  as  well  as  in  the  event  of  it becoming  contaminated  by  the  vitiated  principles  of the  body,  should  consist  in  improving  its  quantity  by elixirs  and  remedies  possessed  of  rejuvenating  properties, tending  to  increase  the  quantity  of  such  fluid  (albumen  1 in  the  body.  A  patient  who  has  lost  all  consciousness owing  to  an  excessive  loss  or  waste  of  albumen) should  be  given  up  by  a  physician   as  incurable\
The  oily  or  albuminous  matter  found  within the  components  of  the  other  fundamental  principles (Dhatu)  of  the  body  as  metabolised  by  the internal  heat  and  regularly  metamorphosed  into the  succeeding  ones)  should  be  grouped  under the  head  of  fiery  or  thermogenetic  (Agneya)) substances.  This  fatty  matter  iVas^'i  predominates  in the  female  organism  and  produces   its  peculiar  softness,
134  ^^^  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [Chap.  XV.
beauty  and  pleasing  shape,  causes  the  grovrth  of  scanty but  soft  hair  on  its  surface.  It  strengthens  the  eyesight and  increases  the  energy  of  the  body,  improves  its power  of  digestion  and  heightens  its  glow  and  com- plexion. Fat  is  deranged  by  such  acts  as,  an  abuse  of astringent,  bitter,  cold,  parchifying  or  Vistambhi (indigestible  food  which  remains  stuffed  in  the stomach^  substances,  a  voluntary  repression  of  the  natural urging  for  evacutions  of  the  body,  by  excessive  sexual  in- dulgence, and  fatiguing  physical  exercise,  or  by  the draining  action  of  any  particular  disease.
An  instance  of  dislodgment  of  fat  from  its  proper  seat or  locality  is  attended  by  such  symptoms  as  roughness of  the  skin,  loss  of  the  natural  healthful  glow  of  the  body and  a  breaking  or  an  aching  pain  in  the  limbs.  Anaemia or  a  gradual  emaciation  of  the  body,  impaired  digestive function  and  a  slanting  or  downward  course  of  the deranged  humours,  mark  the  case  where  the  bodily  fat  has undergone  a  change  in  its  natural  properties  through  any foul  contamination.  A  case  of  loss  or  waste  of  the  bodily fat  is  marked  by  such  S5aTiptoms  as,  impaired  digestive function,  dulness  of  sight,  decay  of  strength  and  aggra- vation of  the  bodily  Vayu,  and  always  ends  in  death.
The  medical  treatment  in  the  latter  case  (loss  of  fat) should  consist  in  the  administration  of  oily  or  emollient drinks,  use  of  medicated  unguents  or  lubrications, Pradeha     (plasters    of     oleaginous    substances)     and
Chap.  XV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  13^
Parisheka  (washes)  and  a  diet   comprising  light,  cooling and  well-cooked  articles  of  food.
lYIetrical  texts  : — A  person  suffering  from a  wasting  of  any  of  the  constituent  humours  or fundamental  principles  or  excrements  of  the  body, as  well  as  one  suffering  from  loss  of  Ojah  (albumen) naturally  craves  for  drink  and  food  that  tend  to  con- tribute directly  to  the  formation  of  the  matter  (or  bodily principle)  so  lost  or  wasted.  Conversely,  the  particular food  or  drink  longed  for  b}'  a  person  suffering from  a  loss  or  waste  of  any  of  the  abovesaid  fluids  or principles,  should  be  looked  upon  as  possessed  of a  curative  virtue  in  that  particular  case.  Such  a person  devoid  of  consciousness  and  divested  of  his bodily  and  intellectual  functions  through  a  deranged state  of  the  bodih'  Vayu  ner\-e-force)  and  extremely weak  and  enfeebled  owing  to  the  loss  of  the  vital  fluid should  be  regarded  as  past  all  cure.
Etiology  of  Obesity  :— Obesity  or  loss  of flesh  (Karsha)  should  be  ascribed  to  changes  in  the  condi- tion of  the  lymph  chyle.  The  lymph  chyle  derived  from the  assimilated  food  of  a  person,  who  is  habituated  to  a course  of  diet  which  tends  to  promote  the  quantitv  of the  bodily  Kapham  or  is  in  the  habit  of  pampering  his belly  even  when  a  previous  meal  has  not  been  thoroughly digested,  or  who  is  addicted  to  a  habit  of  sleeping  in  the day,  or  leading  a  sedentary  life,  or  is  averse  to   taking
136  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        t  Chap.  XV.
any  sort  of  physical  exercise,  continues  in  an  immature State  and  is  transformed  into  a  serum  of  sweet  taste  which moves  about  within  the  body,  engendering  the  formation of  fat  which  produces  excessive  stoutness.  A  person afflicted  with  obesity  develops  such  symptoms  as  short- ness of  breath,  thirst,  ravenous  appetite,  excessive  sleepi- ness, perspiration,  fetid  odours  in  the  body,  wheezing sound  in  the  throat  during  sleep  or  sudden  suspension  of breath,  inert  feeling  in  the  limbs,  dulness  or  heaviness of  the  body,  and  indistinctness  of  speech.  Owing  to the  softness  of  fat,  a  fatty  person  is  unntted  for  every kind  of  work.  Capacity  for  sexual  intercourse  is  dimi- nished (in  such  a  one),  owing  to  the  obstruction  of  the passage  of  semen  by  phlegm  and  fatty  deposits ; and  the  growth  of  the  rest  of  the  root-principles of  the  body  such  as,  lymph  chyle,  albumen,  semen, etc.,  is  considerably  arrested  owing  to  the  deposit of  fatty  matter  within  the  channels  of  the  internal passages  of  the  body,  thus  seriously  affecting  his  bodily strength.  An  obese  or  excessively  corpulent  person  is likely  to  be  afflicted  with  any  of  the  following  diseases such  as,  urethral  discharges,  eruptions,  boils,  carbuncles, fever,  fistula  in  ano,  or  with  any  of  the  diseases  which are  caused  by  a  deranged  state  of  the  bodily  V^3ai ; and  such  attacks  are  invariably  found  to  terminate in  death.  Any  disease  in  such  a  person  is  apt  to  develop into  one  of  a  violent  and  dangerous  type  owing  to  the obstruction  of  the  internal  channels  with  deposits  of  fat.
Chap.  XV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
^2^7
Hence  all  things  or   conditions  which  foster  the  growth of  abnormal  fat  should  be  carefully  avoided.
Accordingly  medicated  compositions,  consisting  of such  drugs  and  substances  as  Shilajatu,  Guggulu, Go-Mutram,  Triphala,  Loharaja,  Rasanjanam,  IMadhu, Yava,  Mudga,  Koradusha,  Shyamaka  and  Uddiilaka which  are  anti-fat  in  their  properties,  or  of  remedial agents  possessing  the  efficacy  of  cleansing  the internal  channels,  as  well  as  enematas  of  liquefacient solutions  technically  known  as  Lekhana  Vastis  and physical  exercise  should  be  prescribed.
Etiology  of  Karshyam  :— Loss  of  flesh  or a  gradual  emaciation  of  the  body  should  be  ascribed  to the  partaking  of  food  in  the  composition  of  which,  matter which  aggravates  the  bodily  Vayu  largel)'  or  excessively enters,  to  over-fatiguing  physical  exercise,  sexual  excess- es, over  study,  fright,  grief  or  anxiety,  to  the  keeping up  of  late  hours,  to  unsatisfied  hunger,  insufficient  food, and  to  astringent  food  which  tends  to  dr}-  up  the  lymph chyle.  The  chyle,  thus  parched  up,  moves  about  in  the organism,  but  fails  to  impart  to  it  the  necessary  nutritive element  owing  to  its  being  insufficiently  charged  with  it, thus  causing  the  body  to  grow  extremely  emaciated.
A  patient  suffering  from  extreme  emaciation  of  the body  fails  to  bear  the  inclemencies  of  weather  and  the variations  of  terrestrial  heat,  and  becomes  apathetic  to all  movements  and   does  but   imperfectly  perform   the
138  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.  XV.
functions  of  vitality,  and  is  also  incapable  of  enduring thirst  or  hunger.  The  bodily  strength  suffers  a  gradual diminution,  and  diseases,  incidental  to  a  deranged  state of  the  bodily  Vayu,  make  their  appearance,  and  the patient  has  to  meet  his  doom  from  any  of  the  following diseases  as  asthma,  cough,  Shosha  (phthisis),  enlarged spleen  or  liver,  abdominal  drops}^,  dyspepsia,  abdominal glands  and  haemoptysis.  Any  disease  appearing  in  such a  patient  develops  into  one  of  a  violent  type  owing  to the  loss  or  diminished  condition  of  the  bodily  strength or  protoplasm  (Prina).
Contrarily,  conditions  or  factors  which  produce obesity  should  be  avoided.  A  case  of  patent  obesity should  be  checked  with  a  medicated  compound,  con- sisting of  such  drugs  as,  Payasya,  Ashvagandha,  Vidari, Vidarigandha,  Shat^vari,  Vala,  Ativala,  Nagavala  and  such other  drugs  of  sweet  taste.  Diets  consisting  of  thickened milk,  clarified  butter,  ciu^d,  meat,  boiled  Shall  rice, Yasthika,  wheat,  barley,  etc.,  should  be  prescribed  in  the case  ;  and  sleep  in  the  day,  sexual  indulgence,  physical exercise,  etc.,  should  be  prohibited.  Enematas  of  nutri- tive substances  can  be  likewise  given  with  advantage.
On  the  other  hand,  the  lymph  chyle  of  a  man,  who partakes  of  food  belonging  to  both  the  abovesaid  classes, courses  through  his  organism  and  strengthens  the  root- principles  of  his  body,  thus  giving  a  middling  or  health- ful rotundity  to  his  limbs  owing  to  its  properties  being
Chap.  XV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  j^c^
equipoised.  A  man  possessed  of  such  a  body  is  capable of  all  kinds  of  work  and  movement.  He  can  fairly  stand the  inclemencies  of  weather  and  the  keenness  of  hunger and  thirst,  and  will  gain  in  strength  and  energy.  Care should  be  always  taken  to  have  such  a  well  equipped body  of  moderate  size.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject*:— Excessively  corpulent  and  excessively  lean persons  are  alike  condemnable.  A  body  which  is neither  too  stout  nor  too  lean,  but  strikes  the  mean as  regards  plumpness,  is  the  best.  A  lean  frame should  have  the  preference  to  a  stout  one.  The  enraged or  aggravated  bodil}-  humours  dry  up  the  fundamental principles  of  the  body,  such  as  the  lymph  chyle  etc.,  just in  the  same  way  as  a  well- kindled  fire  will  evaporate the  water  contained  in  a  basin  placed  over  it.  Since ^the  temperament,  constitution,  size  and  the  fundamental principles  of)  the  body  vary  in  different  individuals ; rand  since  the  body,  in  its  turn,  undergoes  such gradual  transformations  as  infancy,  youth  and  old age),  and  changes  its  state  each  moment,  it  is  absolutely impossible  to  lay  down  the  exact  quantity  of  the deranged  humours,  excrements  and  fundamental principles  (of  lymph  chyle,  blood,  semen,  albumen, etc.)  that  may  be  found  in  the  human  organism. Hence  it  is  necessary  for  a  physician  to  ascertain  their state  of  equilibrium  (their  continuance  in  normal  state  and
[_,^0  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         l  Chap.  XV.
quantity)  at  any  particular  time  ;  and  which  should  be pronounced  onl}'  in  cases  where  sigiis  of  perfect  health would  be  visible.  An  experienced  physician  would naturally  draw  a  contrar}-  inference  from  the  improper functions  of  the  organs  in  an  individual.  A  person with  an  uniformly  healthy  digestion,  and  whose  bodily humours  are  in  a  state  of  equilibrium,  and  in  whom the  fundamental  vital  fluids  course  in  their  normal state  and  quantity,  accompanied  by  the  normal  processes of  secretion,  organic  function,  and  intellection,  is  said to  be  a  healthy  person .
An  intelligent  physician  should  preserAC  the  state of  health  in  a  healthy  individual,  wliile  he  should increase  or  decrease  the  quantity  of  the  bodily  humours, vital  fluids,  or  excrements  in  a  sick  patient  according to  the  exigencies  of  the  case  until  his  health  is  perfectly restored.
Thus  ends  ihe  fifteenth  Chapter  of'the  Sutrasthanam  in  the  Sushruta Samhit^  which  treats  of  the  Development  and  Non-development  of  the humoral  constituenls  of  the  bodv.
CHAPTER    XVI.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of  the piercing  and  bandaging  of  the  lobules  of  ears  (Kama- Vyadha-Vandha-Vidhimadhyaym).
The  lobules  of  the  ears  of  an  infant  are  usually  pierced through  for  protecting  it  (from  the  evil  influences  of mali^ant  stars  and  spirits)  and  for  the  purposes  of ornamentation  as  well.  The  piercing  should  be  performed on  a  day  of  bright  fortnight  marked  by  the  auspicious lunar  and  astral  combinations,  and  in  the  sixth  or  the seventh  month  of  the  year  reckoned  from  its  beginning (Bhadra).  The  child  should  be  placed  on  the  lap  of  its nurse,  and  benedictions  should  be  pronounced  over  it. Then  having  soothed  it  and  lured  it  with  toys  and playthings,  the  physician  should  draw  down  with  his left  hand  the  lobules  of  its  ears  with  a  view  to  detect, with  the  help  of  the  reflected  sun-light,  (the  closed  up) apertures  that  are  naturally  found  to  exist  in  those localities.  Then  he  sliould  pierce  them  straight  through with  a  needle  held  in  his  right  hand,  or  with  an  awl  (Ara), or  with  a  thick  needle  where  the  appendages  would be  found  to  be  too  thick.  The  lobule  of  the  right  ear should  be  first  pierced  and  then  the  left  in  the  case  of  a male  child,  while  the  contrary  should  be  the  procedure  in the  case  of  a  female.  Plugs  of  cotton-lint  should  be  then inserted  into  the  holes  of  the  pricked  ear-lobules,  which
1^2  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  XVI.
should  be  lubricated  or  rubbed  with  any  unboiled  oil. A  copious  bleeding  attended  with  pain  would  indicate that  the  needle  has  passed  through  a  place  other  than the  natural  (^and  closed  up)  fissure  described  above  ; whereas  the  absence  of  any  serious  after-effect  would give  rise  to  the  presumption  that  the  piercing  has  been done  through  the  right  spot.  Any  of  the  local  veins incidentally  injured  by  an  ignorant,  bungling  surgeon, may  be  attended  with  symptoms  which  will  be described  under  the  heads  of  K^lika,  Marmarika,  and Lohitika.
Karlika'  is  marked  by  fever  and  a  burning  pain in  the  affected  part  and  swelling.  Marmarika  gives  rise to  pain  and  knotty  (nodular)  formations  about  the affected  region,  accompanied  by  (the  characteristic inflammatory)  fever  ;  while  in  the  last  named  type (Lohitika)  symptoms  such  as,  Manya-Stambha  (numb- ness of  the  tendons  forming  the  nape  of  the  neck), Apatfinak  (a  type  of  tetanus),  Shirograha  (headache)  and Karna-shula  (ear-ache)  exhibit  themselves,  and  they should  be  duly  treated  with  medicinal  remedies  laid down  under  their  respective  heads.  The  lint  should be  speedily  taken  out  from  a  pierced  hole  which  is marked  by  extreme  pain  and  swelling,  etc.,  on  account of  its  being  made  with  a  blunt,  crooked  or  stunted needle,  or  owing  to  its  being  plugged  with  a  deep  and inordinately  large  lint,  or  to  its  being  disturbed  by  the aggravated  bodily  humours  (Doshas),  or  to  its  being  made
Chap.  XVI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 43
at  a  wrong  place.  An  unguent  composed  of  Madhuka, Eranda  roots,  Manjistha,  Yava,  Tila,  honey  and  clarified butter  pasted  together,  should  be  thickly  plastered  over the  affected  part  until  the  ulcers  are  perfectly  healed  ; after  which  the  lobules  of  the  ears  should  be  again pierced  through  according  to  the  directions  laid  down before.
The  lint  should  be  removed,  each  third  da)'-,  and  a thicker  one  should  be  inserted  in  its  stead  on  each successive  occasion,  and  the  part  should  be  rubbed with  (unboiled  oil)  as  before.  For  the  expansion  of the  fissures,  (sticks  of  Nimba  or  Apamarga,  or  rods  of lead)  should  be  inserted  into  them  after  the  subsidence of  the  accompanying  symptoms  and  deranged  bodily humours  t,in  the  locality).
lYIetrical  Text :  — The  fissures  thus  expanded may  ultimately  bifurcate  the  lobules  of  the  ears  owing  to the  effects  of  the  deranged  bodily  humours  (Dosha),  or of  a  blow.  Now  hear  me  discourse  on  the  mode  of adhesioning  them  (with  suitable  bandages).
These  unions  or  adhesions  admit  of  being  briefly divided  into  fifteen  different  kinds,  viz.,  the  Nemi- sandhdnaka,  the  Utpala-Bhedyaka  the  Valluraka,  the Asangima,  the  Ganda-karna,  the  Aharyaya,  the  Nirve- dhima,  the  Vyayojima,  the  Kapata-sandhika,  theArdha- kap^ta-sandhika,  the  Samkshipta,  the  Hina-karna,  the Vallikarna,  the  Yasthi-karna,  and  the  Kakaushthaka.
144  '^^^  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XVI.
Out  of  these,  the  process,  known  as  the  Nemi- sandhanaka,  should  be  used  in  cases  where  each  of the  bifurcated  lobes  of  the  ears  would  be  found  to  be thick,  extended,  and  equal  in  size.  The  process,  known as  the  Utpala-Bhedyaka,  should  be  used  in  cases where  the  severed  lobes  of  the  ears  would  be  found  to be  round,  extended,  and  equal  in  dimensions.  The process,  Valluraka  should  be  resorted  to  in  cases  where the  severed  lobes  of  the  ears  would  be  found  to  be short,  circular  and  equal  in  size.  The  process,  known as  the  Asangima,  should  be  adopted  in  cases  where the  anterior  surface  of  one  of  these  severed  appendages would  have  a  more  elongated  shape  than  the  other. The  process,  known  as  the  Ganda-Karna,  consists  in slicing  off  a  patch  of  healthy  flesh  from  one  of  the regions  of  the  cheeks  and  in  adhering  it  to  one  of  the severed  lobes  of  the  ears  which  is  more  elongated  on its  anterior  side  than  the  other  (Plastic-operations).  In the  case  of  extremely  short  lobes,  the  flesh  should  be cutoff  from  both  the  cheeks  and  adhered  to  them,  the process  being  known  as  the  Aharyaya.  The  lobes  of  the ears  which  have  been  completely  severed  from  their  roots are  called  Pithopamas.  The  process  known  as  the Nirvedhima  should  be  resorted  to  in  such  cases  by piercing  the  two  Putrikas  (Tragus  and  Anti-tragus  of the  ears.
The  process  known  as  the  Vyayojima  should  be made   use    of  in   cases   where   one   of   the   bifurcated
1
Chap.  XVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  145
lobes  of  the  ear  should  be  found  to  be  dissimilar  to the  other  as  regards  its .  thickness  or  thinness.  The process  known  as  Kapata-Sandhika  consists  in  bring- ing about  an  adhesion,  on  the  posterior  side,  between one  of  the  bifurcated  lobes  and  another,  which  is elongated  on  the  anterior  side  of  the  ear.  The  adhesion is  so  called  from  the  fact  of  its  resembling  the  closing  of the  two  leaves  of  a  door  'Kapatam),  The  process knoWn  as  the  Ardha-Kapata-Sandhika  consists  in  bring- ing about  an  adhesion  on  the  anterior  side  between the  shorter  one  of  the  two  parts  of  a  bifurcated  ear- lobe  with  the  part,  elongated  on  the  posterior  side,  like a  half- closed  door.
The  ten  aforesaid  processes  of  adhesion  may  be successfully  brought  about  and  their  shapes  can  be easily  pictured  from  the  meanings  of  their  respective names.
The  remaining  five  sorts  such  as  the  Samkhiptam  etc., are  seldom  attended  with  success  and  hence  are  called impracticable  (Asadhayas'.  The  process  Samkhiptam has  its  scope  in  the  case  where  the  auricle  (^Shashkuli) has  been  withered  up  and  one  of  the  bifurcated  lobes is  raised,  the  other  being  reduced  and  shortened.  The process  of  Hina-karna  should  be  adopted  in  cases where  the  supporting  rim  of  the  lobe  (pinna)  has  been entirely  swept  away  and  its  exterior  sides  and  the  cheeks are  sunk  and   devoid   of  flesh.     Similarly   the  adhesive
19
146  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XVI.
process  known  as  the  Vallikarna  is  indicated  in cases  where  the  lobes  are  short,  thin  and  unequal. The  adhesion  known  as  the  Yasthi  Kama  is  indicated in  cases  where  the  thin  and  severed  ear-lobes  are  run across  with  veins  and  made  of  knotty  or  nodular  flesh. The  case  in  which  the  ear-lobe,  being  permeated  with a  little  quantity  of  blood,  is  fleshless  and  ends in  a  narrow  tip  or  end,  furnishes  the  occasion  for Kakusthakapaii.
The  five  abovesaid  adhesions,  if  followed  by  swelling, inflammation,  suppuration  and  redness  of  the  affected part  and  found  to  be  secreting  a  sort  of  slimy  pus or  studded  over  with  pustular  eruptions,  may  be apprehended  as  not  to  be  attended  with  success.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — The  exact  middle  point  of  the  external  ear should  be  pierced  (with  a  knife^  and  the  severed  parts should  be  pulled  down  and  elongated  in  the  case  where both  the  parts  of  a  bifurcated  ear-lobe  would  be found  to  have  been  entirely  lost  or  eaten  away.  In the  case  where  the  posterior  one  of  the  two  bifurcated parts  would  be  found  to  be  longer  or  more  elongated,  the adhesion  should  be  effected  on  the  anterior  side  ;  whereas the  contrary  should  be  the  case  where  the  anterior one  would  appear  to  be  more  elongated.  Only  the remaining  one  of  the  two  bifurcated  parts  of  an  ear-lobe would  be  pierced,  cut  in  two  and  adhesioned  on  the  top,
Chap.  XVI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  147
in  the  case  where  the  other  part  would  be  found  to be  gone.  A  surgeon  well-versed  in  the  knowledge  of surgery  ''Sh^stras  should  slice  off  a  patch  of  living flesh  from  the  cheek  of  a  person  devoid  of  ear-lobes in  a  manner  so  as  to  have  one  of  its  ends  attached to  its  former  seat  (cheek).  Then  the  part,  where the  artificial  ear-lobe  is  to  be  made,  should  be  slightly scarified  (with  a  knife),  and  the  living  flesh,  full  of blood'and  sliced  off  as  previously  directed,  should  be adhesioned  to  it  (so  as  to  resemble  a  natural  ear-lobe in  shape).
A  surgeon,  wishing  to  effect  any  sort  of  adhesion other  than  those  described  before,  should  first  collect  the articles  enumerated  in  the  chapter  on  Preliminary Measures  to  Surgical  Operations,  together  with  milk, water,  Dh^ny^mla  (fermented  rice  boilings),  Suramanda (transparent  surface-part  of  wine)  and  powders  of earthen  vessel.  Then  the  hair  of  the  patient,  whether male  or  female,  should  be  gathered  and  tied  up  in  a knot,  and  the  patient  should  be  given  a  light  food (so  as  to  keep  up  his  strength  without  hampering his  digestion)  ;  after  which  his  friends  and  relations should  be  asked  to  hold  him  firm.  Then  having  ascer- tained the  particular  nature  of  adhesion  to  be  effected in  the  case,  the  smgeon  should  examine  the  local  blood by  incising,  excising,  scarifying  or  puncturing  the affected  lobes  as  found  necessary,  and  determine whether  the  same  is  pure   or  vitiated.    Then  having
I_|8  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.        [  Chap.  XVI.
washed  the  blood  with  Dhanyamla  and  tepid  water, if  found  vitiated  through  the  action  of  the  deranged (V^yu),  or  with  milk  and  cold  water  in  the  event  of the  same  being  contaminated  by  the  deranged  Pittam, or  with  Suramanda  and  warm  water  in  the  case  of  its being  vitiated  by  the  action  of  the  disordered Kapham,  the  surgeon  shall  bring  about  the  ad- hesion by  again  scarifying  the  affected  parts  of  the ear,  so  as  not  to  leave  the  adhesioned  parts  elevated (raised),  unequal  and  short.  Of  course  the  adhesion should  be  effected  with  the  blood  being  still  left  in  the parts  that  had  been  scraped.  Then  having  anointed them  with  honey  and  clarified  butter,  they  should  be covered  with  cotton  and  linen,  and  tied  with  strings of  thread,  neither  too  loose  nor  too  tight,  and  dusted over  with  powders  of  baked  clay.  Then  directions should  be  given  as  regards  the  diet  and  nursing  of the  patient,  who  may  be  as  well  treated  with  the regimen  laid  down  in  the  chapter  on  Dvi-vraniyam.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — Tlie  patient  should  be  careful  not  to  disturb the  bandage  and  avoid  physical  exercise,  over- eating, sexual  intercourse,  exposure  to,  or  basking  in,  the  glare of  fire,  fatiguing  talk,  and  sleep  by  day.  For  three consecutive  days  the  ulcer  should  be  anointed  with unboiled  oil  ;  and  cotton  soaked  in  the  same  substance should  be  placed  over  it,  which  is  to  be  altered, each  third  day,  till  healing.
Chap.  XVI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  14^
The  incidental  ulcer  should  not  be  tried  to  be healed  up  as  long  as  the  local  blood  (blood  in  the ulcer)  is  not  fully  purified  ;  or  so  long  as  there is  haemorrhage  from  the  seat  of  the  affection  or the  local  blood  continues  feeble.  An  ulcer,  adhesion- ed  with  the  least  of  the  Vayu-vitiated  blood continuing  in  its  inside,  will  spontaneously  burst  or break  open  afresh.  It  will  be  again  attended  with pain,  -burning,  redness  and  suppuration  in  the  event  of its  being  closed  with  a  little  quantity  of  Pitta-deranged blood  incarcerated  in  its  inside.  Adhesioned  even  with a  little  quantity  of  Kapha  fouled  blood  in  its  cavity an  ulcer  is  marked  by  itching  and  numbness.  An  ulcer adhesioned  with  the  continuance  of  an  active  haemor- rhage from  its  inside  is  marked  by  a  brown  or  blackish yellow  swelling.  An  ulcer,  adhesioned  at  a  time  when the  local  blood,  though  otherwise  good  or  pure,  has been  thinned  or  weakened  through  excessive  bleeding, is  followed  by  a  corresponding  emaciation  (thinness) of  the  adhesioned  part.  The  lobule  of  the  ear  thus adhesioned  should  be  gradually  pulled  down  and elongated  after  the  complete  healing  of  the  local  ulcer and  the  subsidence  of  its  concomitant  symptoms,  and after  the  cicatrix  has  assumed  the  colour  of  the skin  of  the  surrounding  part.  Otherwise  the  adhesioned part  may  be  characterised  by  pain,  swelling,  infla- mmation, burning  and  suppuration,  or  the  adhesion may    again    fall     off.    An    adhesioned     ear-lobe,    un-
I50
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XVI.
accompanied  by  any  of  the  distressing  or  unfavourable symptoms,  should  be  gradually  elongated  by  rubbing it  with  an  unguent  composed  of  the  milk,  fat,  and marrow  of  any  such  animals  and  birds  as  the  Godha,  the Pratudas,  the  Vishkiras,  the  Anupas,  or  the  Audakas  as would  be  available,  and  clarified  butter  and  the  oil  ex- pressed out  of  the  seeds  of  white  mustard,  boiled  with the  decoction  or  Kvatha  of  Arka,  Alarka,  VaU, AtivaU,  Anant^,  Apamarga,  Ashvagandh^,  V.idari- gandha,  Kshira-Shukla,  Jalashuka  and  the  drugs  form- ing the  group  known  as  the  Madhura,  which  should be  previously  prepared  and  carefully  stowed  in  a covered  receptacle.
IVIetrical  texts  :— Then  the  above  medicinal unguent  should  be  applied  or  rubbed  over  the  lobe  of the  affected  ear,  whereby  all  the  disturbing  or  unfavour- able symptoms  would  be  subsided,  thus  favouring  its firm  and  steady  growth.  Similarly  a  plaster  composed of  Yava,  Ashvagandh^,  Yashtyahva,  and  Tila,  pasted together  might  be  rubbed  over  the  affected  ear-lobe  with advantage.  Oil  prepared  and  boiled  with  the  essence  of Shatavari,  and  Ashvagandh^,  or  Payasya,  Eranda,  Jivana and  milk  increases  the  growth  of  an  ear-lobe.  The  lobe of  an  ear,  which  refuses  to  grow  in  size  in  spite  of  being fomented  and  lubricated  as  above  indicated^  should be  scarified  with  slight  longitudinal  incisions  on  its anterior  side  (that  is  on  the  side  nearest  to  the  cheeks)
Chap.  XVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  I^l
and  not  on  the  posterior  one,  as  such  a  procedure  might be  attended  with  dreadful  results.
An  ear-lobe  should  not  be  tried  to  be  elongated  just after  the  adhesion  of  its  two  severed  parts,  inasmuch  as the  centre  of  the  adhesion,  still  being  raw,  might cause  them  to  fall  off  again.  Thus  an  ear-lobe  under the  circumstance  should  be  gradually  elongated,  only when  it  would  be  found  to  be  marked  by  the  growth  of hair  on  its  surface,  and  the  hole  or  the  perforation  has assumed  a  circular  look,  and  the  adhesion  has  become firmly  effected,  well-dried,  painless,  even  and  level  in  its entire  length.
The  modes  of  bringing  about  an  adhesion  of  the two  severed  parts  of  an  e;f\-lobe  are  innumerable  ;  and a  skilled  and  experienced  surgeon  should  determine the  shape  and  nature  of  each  according  to  the  exi- gencies of  a  particular  case.*
*  Additional  Text  :— O  Sushrula,  again  I  shall  deal  with  diseases which  affect  the  lobule  of  an  ear  under  the  circumstance  described  above The  deranged  bodily  Vdyu,  Pittam  and  Kaphani,  either  jointly  or  severally, give  rise  to  several  types  of  diseases  which  affect  the  lobule  of  an  ear.  The deranged  V^yu  produces  numbness  and  an  erysipelatous  swelling  and  ul- cer about  the  affected  ear-lobe,  while  an  erysipelatous  ulcer  in  the locality  accompanied  by  swelling,  burning,  suppuration,  etc.,  should  be ascribed  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Pittam.  Heaviness,  numbness  and swelling  of  the  ear-lobe  accompanied  by  constant  itching  in  the  affected locality  mark  the  action  of  the  deranged  Kapham.  The  medical  treatment in  these  cases  consists  in  effecting  a  subsidence  of  the  particular  deranged humour  by  means  of  diaphoresis,  lubrication,  Parishekas  (medicated plasters)  or  blood-letting  as  the  case  may  be.  These  measures  should  be moderately  applied  and  a  nutritive  and  invigorating  food   should   be   pres-
1^2  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.  XVI.
Rhinoplastic  operations  :  -Now  I  shall deal   with   the    process    of  affixing   an    artificial   nose.
cribed  for  the  patient.  The  physician  who  is  well  familiar  with  the  actions of  the  deranged  bodily  humours  as  described  above,  should  be  looked  upon as  alone  entitled  to  take  in  hand  a  case,  which  falls  under  the  head  of  one of  the  preceding  types.
Now  I  shall  enumerate  the  names  of  the  several  diseases  which  affect a  severed  lobe  of  the  ear  and  describe  the  sjTnptoms  which  each  of  them develops  in  succession.  They  are  known  as  UtpStaka,  Utputuka,  Shyava, Bhrisam-kanduj^ta,  Avamantha,  Sakanduka,  Akundaka,  Granthika,  J5m- vala,  SrAvi  and  Dihavdna.  Now  hear  me  discourse  on  the  nature  of medicinal  treatment  to  be  adopted  in  each  of  them.
Remedies  : — A  plaster  composed  of  the  drugs  known  as  Apam£rga, Sarjarasa,  Patala  bark  and  Lakucha  bark  pasted  togather,  or  a  medicated oil  prepared  and  boiled  with  the  preceding  substances  should  be  applied in  a  case  of  the  Utpataka  type,  wherea'  a  case  of  the  Utputuka  type  would prove  amenable  to  a  medicinal  plaster  consisting  of  Shamp&ka,  Shigru, Putika,  the  fat  and  marrow  of  a  GodhS  and  the  milk  and  bile  of  a  she-deer, she-buffalo  or  sow,  pasted  togather  ;  ^r  to  a  medicated  unguent  com- posed of  the  abovesaid  substanees  duly  Lioiled  with  oil.  Similarly,  a  medi- cinal plaster  composed  of  the  drugs  known  as  Gauri,  Sugandhd,  ShydmS, Anantd,  Tanduliyakam,  or  an  oil  prepared  and  boiled  with  the  extract  of the  preceding  drugs,  would  prove  beneficial  in  a  case  of  the  Shyiva  type  of the  desease.  In  a  case  of  the  Vrisham-Sakundakam  type,  the  affected part  should  be  rubbed  or  lubricated  with  an  unguent  or  medicated  oil prepared  with  the  boiled  extract  of  PathA,  Rasanjanam,  Kshoudram,  and warm  Kdnjik5m.  or  a  plaster  composed  of  the  same  drugs  and  substances should  be  applied  over  the  diseased  locality.
In  a  case  of  ulceration,  the  ulcerated  ear-lobe  should  be  rubbed  with  the oil  prepared  and  boiled  with  the  drugs  known  as  Madhukam  and  Kshira- kSkoli,  or  with  those  which  form  the  group  known  as  the  Jivakddi-Varga  ; while  in  a  case  where  Vringhanam  measures  are  to  be  adopted,  lard  pre- pared from  the  fat  of  a  Godhd,  boar,  or  snake  might  be  used  with  advantage. In  the  Avamanthaka  type  the  diseased  ear-lobe  should  be  washed  and covered  with  a  plaster  composed  of  the  drugs  known  as  Prapaundarikam, Madhukam,  Samanga  and  Dhavam,  or  rubbed  with  oil  prepared  and boiled  with  the  same  drugs.  Similarly,  a  case  of  Kandu-Juta  (accompanied with  itching)  would  yield  to  a  plaster  composed  of  the  drugs  known  as SahadevA,  Vishvadevd,  and  Saindhava  salt  pasted  with  goat's  milk,  or  to  the medicated  oil  boiled  and  prepared   with   the   same   drugs   and   substances.
Chap.  XVI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 1;^
First  the  leaf  of  a  creeper,  long  and  broad  enough to  fully  cover  the  whole  of  the  severed  or  clipped off  part,  should  be  gathered  ;  and  a  patch  of  li\ing flesh,  equal  in  dimension  to  the  preceding  leaf,  should be  sliced  off  ;from  down  upward)  from  the  region of  the  cheek  and,  after  scarifying  it  with  a  knife, swiftly  adhered  to  the  severed  nose.  Then  the  cool- headed  physician  should  steadily  tie  it  up  with  a bandage  decent  to  look  at  and  perfectly  suited  to  the end  for  which  it  has  been  employed  (Sadhu  Vandha). The  physician  should  make  sure  that  the  adhesion  of the  severed  parts  has  been  fully  effected  and  then insert  two  small  pipes  into  the  nostrils  to  facilitate respiration,  and  to  prevent  the  adhesioned  flesh  from hanging  down.  After  that,  the  adhesioned  part  should be  dusted  with  the  powders  of  Pattanga,  Yashti- madhukam   and   Rasanjana   pulverised   together ;    and
In  a  case  of  the  Granthika  type  (accompanied  by  the  formation  of  knotty growths  in  its  inside)  the  knotty  growths  or  glandular  formations  should be  first  removed,  and  che  affected  locality  should  be  bled  with  a  surgical instrument  and  dusted  with  powdered  Saindhava  salt.  Likewise,  in  a case  of  J^mvala  type,  blood-letting  should  be  resorted  to  by  scarifying the  seat  of  the  disease,  which  should  be  then  washed  with  a  spray  of  milk. The  ulcer  =^  ild  be  healed  after  the  perfect  purification  of  its  internal morbid  c^  Of  ts.  A  case  of  the  Srivi  (secreting)  type  would  readily vield  to  a  inal  plaster  composed  of  the  drugs  known  as    Madhuparni,
snd  Mad'  ..alil,  or  of  Madhukam  pasted  with  honey,  or  to  the  medicinal  oil Uprepared  and  boiled  with  the  same  drugs  and  substances.  A  case  of  the Jahyam^na  (burning)  tj'pe  should  be  treated  with  a  plaster  composed  of the  drugs  known  as  the  five  Kalkas  and  Madhukam  pasted  together  and nixed  with  clarified  butter,  or  with  a  pasted  compound  of  the  drugs  which form  the  group  of  the  Jivakadi  Varga  with  a  quantity  of  clarified  butter added  to  it. 20
154
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.    [Chap.  XVI.
the  nose  should  be  enveloped  in  Karp^sa  cotton  and several  times  sprinkled  over  with  the  refined  oil  of  pure sesamum.  Clarified  butter  should  be  given  to  the patient  for  drink,  and  he  should  be  anointed  with  oil  and treated  with  purgatives  after  the  complete  digestion of  the  meals  he  has  taken,  as  advised  (in  the  books  of medicine).  Adhesion  should  be  deemed  complete  after the  incidental  ulcer  had  been  perfectly  healed  up,  while the  nose  should  be  again  scarified  and  bandaged  in  the case  of  a  semi  or  partial  adhesion.  The  adhesioned nose  should  be  tried  to  be  elongated  where  it  would fall  short  of  its  natural  and  previous  length,  or  it  should be  surgically  restored  to  its  natural  size  in  the  case  of the  abnormal  growth  of  its  newly  formed  flesh.  The mode  of  bringing  about  the  adhesion  of  severed  lips  is identical  with  what  has  been  described  in  connection with  a  severed  nose  with  the  exception  of  the  insertion of  pipes.  The  physician,  who  is  well  conversant with  these  matters,  can  be  alone  entrusted  with  the medical  treatment  of  a  King.
Thus  ends  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  the  Sutra-Sthina  n   in  the    Sushruta
SamhitS  which  treats  of  the  Piercing  and  Bandaging  of  t    .-lobes.
Jivaw
opted, i  with
nd
d
2d
as the :es.
CHAPTER    XVII.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  deals  with the  mode  of  distinguishing  between  suppurating  and  non- suppurating  swellings.  Ama-pakkaishaniya- madhyayam.
Diseases  such  as,  Granthi  (Aneurism),  Vidradhi, (abscess)  and  Alaji  (inflammation  of  the  edge  of  the cornea)  etc.  are  ushered  in  by  a  preliminary  swelling which  subsequently  develops  symptoms  peculiar  to each  of  them.  These  diseases  differ  in  their  symptoms and  outward  shape.  A  swelling  which  may  appear  at any  part  of  the  body,  and  is  round,  elevated,  even,  or uneven  in  its  (surface)  is  called  a  Shotha  (swelling). It  restricts  itself  to  the  skin  and  flesh  of  its  locality and  is  characterised  by  the  several  or  concerted action  of  the  deranged  bodily  humours.  The  Shothas (swelling)  admit  of  being  divided  into  six  different types  according  as  they  are  caused  by  the  action  of  the deranged  Vayu,  Pittam,  Kapham  or  blood,  or  are  due to  the  concerted  action  of  the  three  fundamental humours  of  the  bod)'',  or  are  of  traumatic  origin.
Now    we     shall    describe    the    symptoms    which
maT'k   the     respective     actions   of   the   humours   in   a
welling.    A  swelling  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged
iyu  a.'tsumes  a  reddish  or  blackish  hue  and  is   shifting
1  its  ciiif acter.     It  feels  rough  and  soft  to  the  touch,
1^6  THE    SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  XVII.
and  is  marked  by  a  sort  of  aching  pain  (peculiar  to  the deranged  Vayu)  which  vanishes  at  intervals.
A  swelling,  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged Pittam,  assumes  a  yellowish  hue.  It  is  soft  and fluctuates  under  pressure,  and  is  marl^ed  by  an  accu- mulation of  blood  in  its  body.  It  swiftly  shifts  from one  part  of  the  body  to  another,  accompanied  by  a burning,  sucking  pain.  A  swelling,  brought  ^bout through  the  deranged  condition  of  the  Kapham,  assumes a  grey  or  whitish  colour.  The  skin  becomes  glossy  and cold,  and  the  swelling  very  slowl)'-  changes  its  original site,  if  it  shifts  at  all,  accompanied  b}-  pain  and  itching. A  swelling  engendered  through  the  concerted  action of  the  three  bodily  humours  successively  manifests  the symptoms  and  assumes  the  colours  respectively  peculiar to  each  of  them.  The  symptoms  which  mark  a  swelling due  to  the  action  of  the  vitiated  blood  are  identical  with those  which  are  exhibited  in  a  swelling  of  the  Pittaja type  with  the  exception  of  the  blackness  of  the  part (and  an  increase  of  heat).  A  swelling  due  to  an external  blow  traumatic)  manifests  symptoms  peculiar to'the  Pittaja  and  blood-origined  types.
A  swelling,  which  does   not   3'ield   to  internal   and external  remedies  on  account  of  an  excessive  accumula tion  of  the   deranged   local   humours,   or   through   +' insufficient  or  contrary  effects  of  the   remedial   ame shows  sign  of  suppuration.  i  can
/ /
Chap.  XVII.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  157
Now  hear  me  describe  the  symptoms,  which  respec- tively mark  an  unsuppurated,  suppurating  or  sup- purated swelhng.  The  un  suppurated  or  immature  stage continues  as  long  as  the  skin  of  the  swelling  retains its  natural  hue,  marked  by  a  little  pain  and  heat  in its  inside,  and  coldness,  hardness  and  a  slight  elevation of  its  surface.
The  suppurating  stage  gives  rise  to  a  sensation  of pricking  pain  in  the  affected  locality.  The  swelhng seems  as  if  it  is  being  pricked  with  needles,  or  bitten or  wandered  over  by  a  host  of  ants,  or  cut  with  a knife,  or  pierced  with  a  spear,  or  thrashed  with  a  club, or  pressed  with  the  hand,  or  scraped  round  with  fingers, or  burnt  with  a  fire  or  an  alkali.  The  patient  complains of  a  sort  of  sucking,  burning  pain  in  the  swelling  of a  fixed  or  shifting  character.  The  patient,  as  if  stung by  a  scorpion,  does  not  find  comfort  in  any  place or  position.  The  hue  of  the  local  skin  is  changed and  the  swelling  goes  on  increasing  like  an  inflated leather  bag  ;  and  fever,  thirst,  a  burning  sensation  and aversion  to  food  etc.  gradually  supervene.
The  suppurated  stage  is  marked  by  an  amelioration of  the  local  pain  and  a  yellowishness  of  the  skin  over  the swelling,  which  cracks  and  seems  too  big,  thus  giving pu§  to  folds  in  the  integument.  The  swelling  exhibits the  uation  under  pressure  and  shows  perceptible  signs large  cdinution.     Moreover,   it    yields  to  pressure  and
1^8  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XVII,
reaches  its  former  height  when  the  pressure  is  removed. The  pus  or  the  suppurated  matter  changes  its  place,  or shifts  from  one  part  of  the  sweUing  to  another  under pressure  hke  water  in  a  bloated  leather  bag.  The distressing  symptoms  gradually  subside ;  the  patient again  evinces  a  desire  for  food,  and  feels  a  constant inclination  for  scratching  the  affected  part  which  is characterised  by  a  sort  of  aching  pain.  Sometimes, as  in  cases  of  traumatic  swelling  or  in  those  brought about  by  a  deranged  condition  of  the  Kapham,  the suppurating  process  is  restricted  to  the  deeper  tissues of  the  affected  part  and  hence  fail  to  exhibit  its characteristic  symptoms — a  fact  which  often  misleads a  physician  (surgeon)  as  regards  the  true  state  (lit  : — whether  suppurated  or  not)  of  the  accompan3'ing  swell- ing. But  the  knowledge  that  a  process  of  suppuration, occurring  in  the  deeper  tissues  of  an  affected  part,  is accompanied  by  alleviation  of  the  pain  and  swelling which  becomes  as  compact  as  a  stone  and  cold  to  the touch,  and  the  local  skin  resuming  its  natural  colour, would  unquestionably  ward  off  all  apprehensions  for error  of  judgment.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject :— A  physician  (surgeon)  who  is  fully  conversant with  the  symptoms  which  are  respectively  exhibited by  (an  inflammatory)  swelling  in  its  unsuppurated,  supT purating  and  suppurated  stages,  is  alone  worthy  of  the epithet  ;   the   rest  are  but  impostors.     Since  there  can
/
Chap.  XVil.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  159
be  no  pain  without  the  intervention  of  the  deranged V^yu  ;  and  no  suppuration  can  set  in  without  the action  of  the  deranged  Pittam  ;  nor  pus,  without  the action  of  the  deranged  Kapham  ;  it  is  evident  that  a suppurated  swelling  is  marked  b}^  the  combined  and simultaneous  action  of  the  three  deranged  humours  of the  body.
According  to  certain  authorities,  the  deranged Pittam  gets  the  preponderance  over  the  local  Vayu  and Kapham,  and  transforms  the  blood  into  pus  out  of  its own  preponderant  energy.
The  incision  or  opening  of  a  swelling  in  its  inflam- matory or  unsuppurated  (lit.  immature,  unripe)  stage is  attended  with  the  destruction  of  the  local  flesh,  liga- ment, bone,  vein,  or  joint,  and  is  usually  followed  by excessive  haemorrhage.  The  incidental  wound  becomes extremely  painful.  Many  distressing  symptoms  begin to  manifest  themselves  in  succession  and  cavities  are formed  inside  the  wound  which  may  lapse  into  a case  of  Kshata-Vidradhi  (a  type  of  ulcerated  abscess).
On  the  other  hand,  a  fully  suppurated  swelling,  left unopened  for  a  long  time  out  of  fear  or  ignorance  by  the attending  physician,  is  attended  with  symptoms  which  are fraught  with  dreadful  consequences.  The  accumulated pus,  unable  to  find  an  outlet,  is  infiltrated  and  attacks the  deeper  tissues  of  the  affected  part,  and  forms large  cavities  or  sinuses  in  their  inside,  thus  converting
l6o  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XVII.
the     disease     into   one     of    a    difficult    or  incurable type.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — The  physician  (surgeon)  who  opens  an  unsup- purated  or  unripe  swelling  out  of  ignorance,  as  well  as the  man  who  neglects  a  fully  suppurated  one,  should be  looked  upon  as  the  vilest  Chandala  for  his  wrong or  incorrect  diagnosis.  The  patient  should  be  provided with  a  meal  before  the  surgical  operation,  or  strong wine  should  be  given  him,  if  he  is  found  to  be  addicted to  the  habit  of  taking  any.  The  effect  of  a  good  meal under  the  circumstance  will  be  to  keep  up  the  strength of  the  patient  and  to  guard  against  his  swooning  during the  operation,  while  the  effect  of  wine  will  be  to  make him  unconscious  of  the  pain.  The  rule  as  regards  the feeding  and  anaesthetising  (wine  giving)  of  the  patient should  be  strictly  adhered  to,  since  the  internal vital  principle  of  a  man  is  invigorated  by  the  strength of  his  body  which  is  the  product  of  lymph-chyle,  the essence  of  food,  and  the  quintessence  of  the  five material  principles.  A  swelling,  no  matter  whether limited  or  extensive,  spontaneously  runs  on  to  suppura- tion, if  not  medicinally  treated,  or  left  to  nature.  The base  of  such  a  swelling  goes  on  extending.  It  becomes unequally  suppurated  and  reaches  an  unequal  elevation, thus  affecting  the  deeper  tissues  of  the  part  and  swiftly running  into  one  of  an  incurable  type.  A  swelHng,  which does  not  yield  to  the  application  of  medicated  plasters
Chap.  XVII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  l6l
or  to  corrective  or  blood-letting  measures,  speedily  and uniformly  suppurates,  and  •  is  marked  by  a  small  and restricted  base  and  a  circular  or  conical  elevation.  As a  blazing  fire  fed  by  gusts  of  favourable  wind  soon consumes  a  withered  forest,  so  the  incarcerated  pus,  in the  absence  of  any  outlet,  attacks  and  eats  away  the healthy  flesh,  veins  and  nerves  of  an  organism.
Surgical  acts  in  connection  with  an  abscess  (Shotha) may  be  divided  into  seven  kinds  such  as  i.  mutila- tion  (Vimlapanam)    of    the    swelling    by     massage,
2.  Avashechanam  (bleeding  or  application  of  leeches)
3.  Upanaham  (poulticing)  4.  Patanam  (opening  or incision;  5.  Shodhanam  (purification  of  the  internal morbid  matter  of  an  incised  boil  with  corrective medicines)  6.  Ropanam  (healing)  and  7.  Vaikritdpa- ham  (restoring  of  the  natural  colour  of  the  skin  to the  cicatrix).
Thus  ends  the  .scvciUecnlh  Chaplei  of  ihc  Suiiaslhfinam  in  ttie Siisliiul;!  Sanihit^  which  lieals  ofhuw  to  (hslinguisli  Ijetween  suppurating and  noii-suppurating  swelhngs.
21
CHAPTER     X  V 1 1 1 .
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  treats of  dressings  and  bandages  of  ulcers  (Vranarlepana- Vandha-Vidhi-madhyayam).
A  medicinal  plaster  should  be  regarded  as  the general  and  most  important  remedy  in  all  cases  of (inflammatory)  swelling.  We  shall  presently  discuss the  nature  of  plasters  to  be  used  in  each  specific  form of  disease.  A  bandage  plays  a  more  important  part  (than a  medicinal  plaster)  as  regards  its  healing  and  curative efficacy,  inasmuch  as  it  materially  contributes  to  the purification  and  healing  of  an  ulcer  and  keeps  the joints  steady.  A  medicinal  plaster  should  be  applied from  down  upward  or  in  a  direction  contrary-  to that  of  the  local  hair  (Pratiloma).  It  should  never be  applied  (so  as  to  run  down  with  the  local  hair), since  a  plaster,  applied  as  directed  above,  would  firmly stick  to  the  surface  of  the  affected  part,  and  naturally percolate  through  the  follicles  of  the  hair  and  the external  orifices  of  the  vehicles  of  perspiration (Sudoriferous  ducts),  thus  permeating  the  organism with  its  own  native  potency  and  virtue.
A  medicinal  plaster  should  be  removed  or  replaced by  a  fresh  one  as  soon  as  it  has  become  dry, except   in  cases   where   the   purpose  of  its  application
Chap.  XVIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  l6^
would  be   found   to  be  the  drawing  of  pus  to  a  definite head  (Pidayitavya  Vrana).'
A  dried  medicinal  plaster  will  prove  useless  or abortive,  and  may  act  as  a  caustic  or  corrosive  agent. A  medicinal  plaster  admits  of  being  grouped  under any  of  the  three  subheads  of  Pralepa,  Pradeha  and Alepana  (according  to  its  thickness  or  consistency)  etc.
IVIeciicinal  plasters  :— A  medicinal  plaster of  the  Pralepa  class  is  applied  thin  and  cold,  and is  made  to  be  endued  with  an  absorbing  (Vishoshi) or  non-absorbing  Avishoshi*)  property  according  to the  nature  of  the  eftbct  desired.
On  the  other  hand,  a  medicinal  plaster  of  the Pradeha  class  is  applied  either  thick  or  thin,  warm or  cold,  and  acts  as  a  non-absorbent.
A  medicinal  plaster  of  the  Alepana  class  stands midway  between  a  Pralepa  and  a  Pradeha.
Of  these,  a  plaster  of  the  Pralepana  class  is possessed  of  the  efficacy  of  pacifying  or  restoring  the deranged  blood  and  Pittam  to  their  normal  condition. A  plaster  of  the  Pradeha  class  pacifies  the  deranged Vayu  and  Kapham  and  tends  to  bring  about  the  union, purification,     and   healing   (of  an     ulcer),   causing  the
*     As  in  the  case  of  a  Pidayitavya  ulcer,    described    before,    where    the withdrawing  or  gathering  of  pus  to  a  definite  head  is  desired.
164
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XVIII.
subsidence  of  pain  and  swelling.  Hence  it  should  be used  in  all  types  of  swelling  whether  ulcerated  or otherwise.
A  medicinal  plaster   (Alepanam)   applied   over   an
ulcer  is  called   by  the   changed   epithet  of  Kalka  or f  ...
Niruddha-Alepanam  (arrestive   or   astringent  plaster).
The  function  of  such  an  Alepanam  consists  in  arresting  a
local  haemorrhage,  in  softening  the  ulcer,  in  withdrawing
sloughing  or  putrifying  flesh  from  its  cavity,  in  checking
the   formation   of  pus   in    its  inside,   and  in  correcting
the  morbid  matter   or  deranged   humours   (that   retard
its  union  and  healing).
IVIetrical  Texts  : — A  medicinal  plaster  of  the Alepanam  class  would  prove  beneficial  in  a  sweHing marked  by  the  absence  of  suppuration,  inasmuch  as  it subdues  the  characteristic  symptoms  of  each  of  the deranged  bodily  humours  y/2,  the  burning  sensation (peculiar  to  the  deranged  Pittam),  itching  (incidental to  the  deranged  state  of  Kapham)  and  the  aching pain  (which  marks  the  disorder  of  the  bodily  Vayu). Its  action  lies  principally  in  cleansing  the  skin,  the flesh  and  the  blood  of  all  morbiferous  diatheses,  in removing  the  burning  sensation,  and  in  alleviating the  piercing  pain  and  itching.
A  physician  (surgeon)  should  use  an  Alepana  in (ulcerous)  diseases  appearing  about  the  anus,  or  about any  other  vital  part ;  Marnias)  of  the  body,  with  a  view
Chap.  XVIII.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 5^
to  bring  about  the  purification  of  the  (local  deranged humours).  In  diseases  caused  by  a  deranged  con- dition of  the  Vayu,  Pittam  or  Kapham,  medicinal plasters  should  be  respectively  mixed  with  a  quantity of  clarified  butter,  measuring  a  sixth,  quarter,  and  an eighth  part  of  their  respective  quantities.
It  has  been  said  that  the  thickness  of  an  Alepa- nam  "should  not  be  made  to  exceed  that  of  the newly-flayed  skin  of  a  buffalo.  Under  no  condition, should  a  medicinal  plaster  be  applied  at  night, inasmuch  as  such  a  measure  would  arrest  the  escape or  radiation  of  heat  from  the  swelling  in  virtue  of its  own  inherent  humidity,  and  thus  bring  on  an aggravation.
Metrical  Texts  : — In  diseases,  which  are amenable  to  the  application  of  medicinal  plasters  of the  Pradeha  type,  as  well  as  in  swellings  resulting from  the  vitiated  condition  of  blood  and  the  Pittam, or  in  those  which  are  of  extrinsic  origin,  or  are  due to  the  effect  of  a  poison  or  blow,  the  plaster  should be  applied  cold,  by  day.  A  plaster  should  not  be applied  without  removing  the  previous  one,  nor  over the  one  applied  on  the  day  before,  as  this  would increase  the  local  heat  and  aggravate  the  pain  and  the burning  sensation  on  account  of  its  greater  or  increased thickness.  A  medicinal  plaster,  previously  used,  should not  be  moistened  and  applied  again  ;  it  should  be  held
l66  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap,  xvili.
as  absolutely  ineffective  owing  to  its  virtue  having  been previously  used  or  soaked  in/
Articles  of  bandaging^ :— Now  we  shall enumerate  the  names  of  articles  which  are  required in  bandaging  ulcers.     They  are  as  follows  : —
Kshauma  (cloth  woven  with  the  fibres  of  Atasi plant),  Avika  (blankets  made  of  sheeps'  wool), Dukulum  (loom-silk),  Kausheya  (silk),  the  Patroma (a  kind  of  cloth  made  of  the  fibres  of  Naga  trees, which  grow  in  the  provinces  of  Paundra  and  Magadha), the  Chinapatta  (Chinese  cloth),  Antarvalkala  (the inner  bark  or  fibres  of  a  tree),  Charma  iskin),  the Alfivu  Shakala  'the  skin  of  a  gourd),  the  Lata-Vidala (half  thrashed  Shyama  creepers),  string  or  cord, the  cream  of  milk,  Tula-phalam  (cotton  seeds)  and iron.  These  accessories  should  be  used  in  considera- tion of  the  exigencies  of  each  case  and  the  time  or  the season  of  the  year  in  which  it  occurs.!
*  This  portion  of  the  text  has  been  omitted  hy  Chakrapani  in  his commentary  entitled  the  Bhdnutniifi.
+  In  a  swelling  or  ulcer  caused  by  the  deranged  \'a\\x  and  Kapham, the  bandage  should  consist  of  a  piece  of  thick  cloth;  whereas  in  summer it  should  consist  of  thin  linen.  Similarly,  a  bandage,  tied  round  anv  deep or  hollow  part  of  the  body,  should  consist  of  a  piece  of  thick  cloth.  The contrary  rule  should  be  observed,  when  the  seat  of  the  bandage  would  be at  any  flexible  part  of  the  body.
Similarly,  in  the  ca.se  of  a  snake-bite,  a  ligature  .should  be-  firmly  tied above  the  punctured  wound  with  a  string  or  twisted  cord  of  cotton,  while a  fractured  bone  should  be  set  right  by  twisting  bunches  iif  half-thrashed shydmS  creeper  (LatAvidala)  round  the  seat  of  fracture.  A  local  hemorrhage
Chap.  XVIII.  ]  SUTRASTHAN A  M.  1 67
Bandag'es  : — The  fourteen  different  forms  of bandage  are  named  as  the  Kosha  (a  sheath  or  scabbard), the  D^ma  (a  cord  or  chaplet ,  the  Svastika  (cross),  the Anuvelhta  a  twist),  the  Pratoli  (a  winding  street  or road),  the  Mandala  (ring),  the  Sthagika  (a  betel -box), the  Yamaka  (double  or  twin),  the  Khatta  (a  bedstead), the  China  (a  streamer),  the  Vivandha  (noose),  the Vitana  (canopy)  the  Gophana  (cow-horn),  the  Panchangi (five  limbed).  Their  shapes  can  be  easil}'  inferred  from the  meanings  of  their  names.
Applications  :— Out  of  these,  the  Kosha  or the  sheath-shaped  bandage  should  be  tied  round  the thumb  and  the  phalanges  of  the  fingers  ;  the  Dama  or chaplet-shaped  bandage,  round  the  narrow  or  unbent parts  of  the  body  ;  the  Svastika  or  cross  shaped,  round the  joints,  round  the  articulations  or  the  Marmas  known as  the  Kurchakas  (Navicular  ligaments)  round  the eye-brows,  round  the  ears  and  round  the  region  of the  breast.  Similarly,  the  bandage,  known  as  the  Anu- vellita,  should  be  used  when  the  seat  of  the  affection would  be  found  to  be  situated  at  the  extremities  (hands and  legs\  A  bandage  of  the  Protoli  class  should  be  tied round  the  neck   or  the   penis  ;  the   Mandalam  'ring-
should  be  arrested  by  binding  the  part  with  milk-cream,  while  the  aflected part  in  a  case  of  Ardita  (facial  paralysis)  as  well  as  a  broken  tooth  should  be bound  with  strings  of  iron,  gold  or  silver.  Warts,  etc.  should  be  bandaged with  Ela  (cardamom  skins),  while  dried  ^ourd-skins  should  be  used  in bandaging  ulcers  on  the  head  (scalp).
1 68  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XVlil.
shaped),  round  the  circular  parts  of  the  body  ;  the Sthagika  (betel-box),  round  the  glans-penis  and  the tips  of  the  fingers  ;  the  Yamakam,  round  the  confluent or  contiguous  ulcers  ;  the  Khatta  (bedstead-shaped), over  and  around  the  cheeks,  cheek-bones,  and  the parts  between  the  ears  and  the  eye-brows  ;  the  Vitdnam over  the  skull,  the  Gophana  (horn-shaped),  round  the region  of  the  chin  ;  and  the  Panchangi,  round  the  part lying  above  the  clavicles.
In  short,  a  bandage  of  any  particular  shape  should be  tied  round  the  part  of  the  body  to  which  it  would be  found  to  be  most  suited.  Now  we  shall  deal  with the  Yantranas  (fastenings  of  bandages)  which  admit  of being  divided  into  three  different  classes  according  as they  are  fastened  above,  below,  or  obliquely  round an  ulcer.
Kavalika'  (Tow)  :— Any  soft  stuffing  or  tow (such  as  the  leaves  or  the  bark  of  trees  of  medicinal virtues)  between  the  medicine  applied  over  an  ulcer and  the  bandaging  linen  is  called  the  Kavalika  (medi- cated tow).  The  tow  or  the  Kavalika  should  be placed  thickly  (on  the  seat  of  affection)  ;  and  then  the physician  (surgeon;  having  pressed  it  with  his  left hand  should*  place  a  piece  of  straight,   soft,   untwisted,
*  Carefully  examining  whether  ihe  applied  remedy  had  been  unifurmly dislributed  over  the  diseased  surface  and  whether  tlie  contemplated pattern  of  bandage  would  l)e  actually  suited  to  the  case.
Chap.  XVIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  1 69
and  unfolded  or  unshrivelled  linen  over  it,  and  then firmly  tie  up  the  bandage  in  a  manner  so  as  not  to leave  any  knot  over  the  seat  of  the  ulcer,  or  to  cause any  discomfort  to  the  patient.
Introduction  of  lint  :— A  Visheshika  (lint) saturated  with  hone}',  clarified  butter,  and  a  medi- cinal paste  should  be  inserted  into  the  ulcer.  Care should  be  taken  not  to  introduce  the  lint  extremely dry,  or  oily  (oversoaked  in  a  lubricating  or  oily  medi- cinal preparation),  inasmuch  as  an  over-lubricated  lint would  give  rise  to  an  excessive  formation  of  slimy mucus  in  the  ulcer,  whereas,  its  parched  substitute would  bring  about  the  friction  and  the  consequent breaking  of  the  edges  of  the  ulcer,  like  one  mis- placed or  wrongly  inserted.
A  bandage  should  be  tied  in  any  of  the  three ways  of  Gadha,  Sama  and  Shithila  fastenings according  to  the  shape  and  seat  of  the  ulcer.* A  tight  bandage  (Gadha- Vandha)  should  be  tied  round the  buttocks,  round  the  sides,  round  the  arm-pits,  round the  inguinal  regions,  round  the  breast  or  round  the head.  A  bandage  of  the  Sama  pattern  should  be fastened  round  the  ears,  round  the   extremities  (hands
*  Additional  text  : — A  bandage,  tightly  tied  round  an  ulcerated  or affected  part  of  the  body  without  causing  any  pain  or  discomfort  to  the patient,  is  called  a  GAdha-Vandha,  while  the  one  which  is  loosely  bound  is called  Shithila,  the  one  neither  too  tight  nor  too  loose  being  called  a  Sama- V'andha. 22
170
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XVIII,
and  legs),  round  the  face,  round  the  throat,  round the  lips,  round  the  penis,  round  the  scrotum,  round  the back,  round  the  belly  and  the  chest.  A  loose  bandaging (Shithila-Vandha)  should  be  the  rule  in  the  region  of the  eyes  and  locations  of  important  joints  or  unions.
An  ulcer,  brought  about  or  characterised  b)^  the symptoms  of  the  deranged  Pittam  and  occurring  at  a place  where  a  tight  bandaging  is  indicated,  should  be fastened  with  one  of  the  Sama-Vandha  class,  and  with a  Shithila  bandage  where  one  of  the  Sama  type  would be  indicated  ;  whereas  it  should  not  be  bandaged  at  all in  the  event  of  a  loose  bandage  (Shithila-Vandha)  being indicated.  The  same  rule  should  be  observed  in  the case  of  an  ulcer  caused  through  a  diseased  or  contami- nated state  of  the  blood.  Similarl}'',  in  the  case  of  an  ulcer produced  through  a  deranged  condition  of  the  Kapha m, a  loose  bandaging,  otherwise  enjoined  to  be  adopted, should  be  substituted  for  one  of  the  same  pattern. A  tight  bandage  should  give  place  to  a  lighter  one under  the  same  circumstances,  and  such  a  procedure should  be  deemed  as  holding  good  even  in  the  case of  an  ulcer  caused  by  the  action  of  the  deranged Vayu.
In  summer  and  autumn,  the  bandage  of  an  ulcer, due  to  the  vitiated  blood  or  Pittam,  should  be  changed twice  a  day  ;  while  the  one  tied  round  an  ulcer  of  the deranged  Vayu  or  Kapham,  should  be  changed  on  each
Chap.  XVIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  171
third  day  in  spring  and  Hemanta.  Similarly,  an  ulcer, marked  by  the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu,  should  be bandaged  twice  a  day.  "  Thou  shalt  exercise  thy  own discretion,  and  vary  or  adopt  the  preceding  rules  of bandaging  according  to  the  exigencies  of  each  case."
A  medicated  lint  fails  to  have  any  efficacy  but rather  tends  to  augment  the  local  pain  and  swelling where  a  bandage,  enjoined  to  be  loosely  bound,  or  bound up  with  moderate  and  uniform  steadiness  (Sama-Vandha), is  replaced  by  a  tight  or  deep  fastened  one  (Gadha- Vandha,.  A  loose  bandage,  injudiciously  used  in  a case  where  a  tight  or  a  moderately  firm  bandage should  have  been  used,  would  cause  the  medicine  to fall  off  from  the  lint  and  give  rise  to  the  consequent friction  and  laceration  of  the  edges  of  the  ulcer. Similarly,  a  moderately  firm  and  steady  bandage (Sama-Vandha;  fastened  in  a  case  where  a  light  or  loose bandage  should  have  been  used,  would  fail  to  produce any  effect.  A  proper  bandage  would  lead  to  the subsidence  of  pain,  and  the  softening  of  the  edges  of the  ulcer,  thus  bringing  about  a  purification  of  the  local blood.
Evils  of  non- bandaging  :~An  ulcer, left  uncovered  and  untied  with  a  suitable  bandage,  is soon  assailed  by  gnats  and  flies.  It  is  moistened  by sweat  and  cold  wind,  etc.  and  stands  in  danger  of being   irritated   by  deposits   of  many   foreign   matters
172  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XVIII.
such  as>  the  particles  of  bone,  dust,  weeds,  etc. Moreover,  a  constant  exposure  to  heat  or  cold  brings  on varied  pains,  the  ulcer  develops  into  one  of  a malignant  type,  and  the  applied  medicinal  plasters are  dried,  encrusted  and  speedily  fall  off.
IVIetrical  Texts  :— A  smashed,  lacerated,  frac- tured, dislocated,  displaced  bone,  or  a  vein  or  a  ligament similarly  jeopardised,  may  be  soon  healed  or  set  right with  the  help  of  a  surgical  bandage.  The  patient  is enabled  by  such  a  means  to  lie  down,  or  stand  up  or move  about  with  ease.  And  an  increased  facility  of rest  or  movement  leads  to  speedy  healing.
Cases  where  bandaging  is  prohibit- ed :  —Ulcers  should  not  be  bandaged  at  all  that  are due  to  the  deranged  condition  of  blood  or  Pittam, or  to  the  effects  of  a  blow  or  of  any  imbibed  poison, and  characterised  by  a  sucking,  burning  pain,  redness, or  suppuration,  as  well  as  those  which  are  incidental to  burns,  or  to  the  applications  of  actual  or  potential cauteries  marked  by  a  sloughing  or  phagedenic  character.
Metrical  Texts  :— An  ulcer  due  to  a  scald  in  a leper  or  a  carbuncle  in  a  diabetic  patient  (Pidaka)  as well  as  a  fleshy  condylomata  due  to  a  bite  from  a venomous  rat,  or  any  other  poisonous  ulcer  should  not be  bandaged  at  all.     The  same  rule  should  be   observed
*     Different  reading  :— Pricking,  burning  pain.
Chap.  XVIII.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 73
in  the  case  of  a  dreadful  suppuration  about  the  anus,  or in  that  of  a  sloughing  ulcej.  An  intelligent  physician, familiar  with  the  specific  features  of  ulcers,  should observe  the  shape  of  the  one  under  treatment,  and prognosticate  the  result  from  its  seat  or  locality  and the  nature  of  the  deranged  bodily  humours  involved in  the  case.  The  season  of  the  year  in  which  an  ulcer is  first  seen  to  appear  also  determines  the  nature  of the  pfognosis.
Bandages  may  be  tied  up  either  from  above,  below, or  from  the  sides  of  a  diseased  locality.  Now  I  shall fully  describe  the  process  of  bandaging  an  ulcer.*  First the  Kavalika  or  tow  should  be  thickly  laid  over  the seat  of  the  ulcer  and  after  that  a  piece  of  soft  and unshrivelled  linen  should  be  placed  upon  it,  and  the bandage  should  be  loosely  or  tightly  tied  up  according to  the  directions  laid  down  before.*
The  lint  and  the  (inserted)  medicine  should  not  be over-lubricated  and  must  not  be  inordinately  oily  in  as- much  as  such  a  lint  or  medicine  would  give  rise  to  the formation  of  excessive  and  abnormal  slimy  mucous  in the  ulcer.  On  the  other  hand,  an  extremely  dry  lint would  set  up  friction  and  laceration  of  the  edges  of the  ulcer,  like  the  one  wrongly  or   improperly   inserted
*  Several  authorities  such  as  GayadAsa,  Brahmadeva,  etc.  hold  this portion  of  the  text  to  be  an  interpolation.  Both  Dallana  and  ChakrapSni have  included  it  within  their  commentaries  with  nearly  the  same  remark.
174  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap,  xviii.
into  its  cavity,  causing  numbness,  excessive  exudation and  unevenness  of  its  surface.  A  lint,  properly saturated  with  a  medicinal  plaster  and  rightly  inserted into  the  cavity  of  an  ulcer,  leads  to  its  speedy  healing. All  secreting  measures  in  connection  with  an  ulcer should  be  continued  or  stopped  according  to  its  condi- tion, whereby  the  nature  and  shape  of  the  bandage should  be  determined  as  well.  An  ulcer,  due  either to  the  deranged  condition  of  blood  or  the  Pittam, should  be  dressed  and  bandaged  once  a  day  which  may be  extended  to  a  number  of  times  in  the  case  of  an ulcer  brought  about  by  the  deranged  Kapham  and  Vayu. The  pus  or  the  local  morbid  matter  should  be  secreted by  pressing  the  base  or  the  bottom  of  an  ulcer  and  b}- gently  moving  the  hand  along  it  in  a  contrary'  direction (down,  upward  ;  and  all  bandages  around  joints  and Gudasandhis)  should  be  duly  tied  up.
The  rules  laid  down  under  the  head  of  adhesioning the  parts  of  a  bifurcated  ear-lobe  would  hold  good  in  a case  of  severed  lips  as  well.  The  measures  amply  dis- cussed in  the  present  Chapter  should  be  extended  by means  of  inference,  analogy  and  judgment  to  apply mutatis  mutandis  to  the  bandaging  of  a  fractured  or dislocated  bone.
An  ulcer,  properly  bandaged,  has  a  greater  chance of  not  being  affected  by  lying  down,  sitting  up,  or  any other   movement   of  the   patient,   nor  by   the   joltings
Chap.  XVIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  1 7^
of  a  conveyance  he  may  ride  or  be  carried  in.  An ulcer  affecting  a  vein  or  a  ligament  or  the  skin  (super- ficial) or  the  flesh  or  the  bones  cannot  be  healed without  bandaging  it.  An  ulcer  situated  in  any  of  the internal  chambers  (cavities)  of  the  bod}',  or  occurring at  any  junction  of  the  limbs  or  organs,  etc.  or  having its  seat  in  a  bone  and  whether  of  a  deep,  superficial, malignant,  or  corrosive  character,  cannot  be  brought  to a  successful  termination  without  the  lielp  of  a  bandage.
Thus  ends  the  eighteenth  Chapter  of  the  Sutrasth^nam  in    the    Siishruta Samhita  which  treats  of  the  dressing  and  bandaging  of  ulcers.
CHAPTER    XIX. Now  we  shall  discuss  the   Chapter  which   treats   of the   management   or   nursing  of  a  patient  with  an  ulcer etc.  (Vranito-pa^saniya-madhyaryam).
First  of  all  a  suitable  chamber  should  be  sought  and selected  for  a  patient,  suffering  from  an  ulcer.  It  should be  roomy  and  spacious  and  situated  in  a  commend- able site.
IVIetrical  Text  :— Diseases,  which  are  physical, mental  or  traumatic  in  their  origin,  can  never  attack a  person  who  dwells  in  a  clean  and  spacious  chamber, protected  from  excessive  heat,  and  strong  gusts  of  wind.
The  bed  should  be  spread  clean,  ample  and comfortable,  with  the  head  of  the  beadstead  turned towards  the  east,  and  provided  with  some  kind  of  a weapon.
rVIetrical  Texts  :— In  a  spacious  and  well- spread  bed,  an  ulcer-patient  can  toss  about  and  move his  limbs  with  the  greatest  comfort.  The  reason  for the  head  being  turned  towards  the  east  is  that  the patient  may  easily  make  obeisance  to  the  (demons and)  celestial  spirits,  who  inhabit  that  quarter  of  the sky.  Thus  the  patient  shall  lie  in  comfortable  posture, attended  upon  by  his  sweet-talking  friends  and  relations.
Chap.  XIX.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 77
Metrical  Text  :— The  friends  and  relations of  a  patient  shall  alleviate  ,  the  pain  of  his  ulcer  with pleasant  and  interesting  topics,  and  by  solacing  him with  the  prospect  of  a  speedy  recovery.  An  ulcer- patient  should  not  sleep  in  the  day  time,  as  it tends  to  aggravate  the  pain,  swelling  and  redness of  the  ulcer,  increases  its  exudations,  and  gives  rise to  itching  and  heaviness  of  the  limbs.
The  patient  must  carefully  protect  the  ulcer  when moving  any  of  his  limbs,  such  as  standing  up,  or sitting  down,  or  turning  on  his  sides,  or  while  moving about,  or  speaking  in  a  loud  voice.
IVIetrical  Text  : — An  ulcer-patient,  even  if he  feels  himself  strong  and  capable,  should  avoid a  standing  or  sitting  posture,  as  well  as  locomotion, and  day-sleep.*  These  acts  done  to  excess,  or  a  long confinement  to  bed  would  aggravate  the  bodily  Vayu, thus  causing  pain  in  the  ulcer.
He  should  studiously  avoid  the  company  and  touch of,  and  even  conversation  with,  women  with  whom  he can  legitimately  have  intercourse.
Metrical  Text  : — The  sight  of  a  woman  etc might  lead  to  the  secretion   and  emission  of  semen  and
*     Different  reading  : — Ridint;    in    a   carriage    or    on    horseback,    and garrulousness.
23
178  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  XIX.
give  rise  to  all  the  distressing  symptoms,  which  are consequent  upon  an  act  of  actual  coitus  under  the circumstance.
Prohibited  diet  :— A  diet  consisting  of newly  harvested  Dhan3''am,  Masha  pulse,  Sesamum_, Kalaya,  Kulattha,  and  Nishpaba  should  be  avoided by  an  ulcer-patient.  The  pot-herbs  known  as  Haritaka- shaka,  acid,  saline  or  pungent  substances,  treacle  and its  modifications,  cakes,  dried  meat,  dried  pot-herbs, goat's  flesh,  mutton,  meat  of  animals  which  are  amphi- bious in  their  habits  or  which  live  close  to  water,  lard, cold  water,  Krishara  (a  composition  prepared  with sesamum,  Masha  pulse  and  rice),  P^yasa  (a  sweetened preparation  of  rice,  milk  and  sugar  boiled  together), curd,  milk  and  whey  should  be  regarded  as  unwholesome.
iVIctrical  Texts  :— Vegetables  and  articles which  belong  to  the  groups  commencing  from  the one  technically  known  as  the  Nava-Dhanya-Varga, and  ending  with  the  one  known  as  the  Takra-Varga, should  be  understood  as  possessed  of  the  property  of '  increasing  the  pus  in  an  ulcer  and  of  aggravating  the deranged  bodily  humours.  If  in  the  habit  of  taking wine,  an  ulcer-patient  will  do  well  to  avoid  the  use of  spirituous  liquors,  such  as  Mairaya,  Arishta,  Asava, Sidhu,  Sura  and  its  varieties.*    An  ulcer  may  develop
*  The  species  of  wine  which  are  made  of  the  expressed  juice  of  grapes and  are  antacids  in  their  virtues,  as  well  as  those  mentioned  under  the  head of  Haemoptysis,  may  be  given  to  an  ulcer-patient.
Chap.  XIX.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
179
into  one  of  a  malignant  type  through  the  use  of  a wine  which  is  acid  in  its  taste,  or  is  sharp,  dry  and heat-making  in  its  potency,  or  is  followed  by almost  instantaneous  intoxication.
An  ulcer-patient  should  avoid  all  things  that  retard the  progress  of  a  rapid  cure,  such  as  wind,  dust,  smoke, exposure  to  heat  and  cold,  over-eating,  unpleasant sounds  and  sights,  envy,  humiliation,  fear,  anger,  grief, scheming,  keeping  of  late  hours,  sitting  or  lying  in  an uneven  posture,  fasting,  garrulousness,  physical  exer- cise, leaping  or  a  standing  posture,  locomotion,  ex- posure to  cold  winds,  ingestion  of  unwholesome,  in- compatible or  indigestible  substances,  and  flea-bites on  the  affected  locality.
IVIctrical  Texts  :— The  food,  partaken  of  by a  weakened  and  emaciated  ulcer-patient,  is  not  fully digested  owing  to  the  above  mentioned,  and  other multifarious  causes.  The  undigested  food  violently disturbs  and  aggravates  the  bodily  humours,  which  move about  in  the  body  and  give  rise  to  swelling,  secretion, burning  pain  and  suppuration  in  the  ulcer.
An  ulcer-patient  should  always  be  clad  in  clean and  white  garments,  have  his  hair  and  nails  closely clipped  and  pared  off,  and  live  in  humble  devotion to  the  Br^hmans,  to  the  gods  and  the  preceptors.  The rites  of  benediction  and  divine  peace  should  be  done unto     him.     Wherefore  ?     Because  the  monsters  and
j8o  the  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XIX.
demons  of  mighty  prowess,  who  are  the  attendants of  the  gods  Pashupati,  Kuvera  and  Kum^ra,  roam about  in  quest  of  prey,  and  visit  the  bedside  of  an ulcer-patient  out  of  their  fondness  for  flesh  and  blood, being  attracted  thereto  by  the  smell  of  the  secreted  and morbid  matter  in  the  ulcer.  These  evil  spirits  come to  take  away  the  life  of  a  patient  in  a  case  which is  doomed  to  terminate  fatally,  while  in  a  successful case  their  advent  is  due  to  the  desire  of  extorting  sacri- ficial oblations  from  him.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject :  —These  honour-seeking  evil  spirits  should  be worshipped  and  propitiated  with  the  whole  heart  ; and  offerings  of  burning  incense  sticks,  edibles  and sacrifices,  etc.  should  be  made  to  them  with  the greatest  humility.
The  evil  spirits,  worshipped  and  propitiated  as above,  spare  the  life  of  a  self-controlled  patient  ^out of  compassion '.  Hence  he  shall  be  kept  in  a  chamber furnished  with  flowers,  garlands,  weapons,  fried  paddy, and  lamps  kept  continuously  burning.  His  friends  and relations  should  regale  him  with  fond  and  loving topics  to  drive  away  the  feeling  of  sleepiness  with  the prospect  of  a  speedy  cure.
Metrical  Texts  :— A  patient,  constantly cheered     with     the    suggested   prospects   of  a   speedy
Chap.   XIX.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  l8l
recovery,    and  beguiled   with    pleasant   and   congenial discourses,  soon  gets  rid  of  his  complaint.
Morning  and  evening,  the  physicians  and  the  Brdh- mans  should  perform  the  rites  of  benediction,  over  him^ as  laid  down  in  the  Rik,  Yajuh,  Saman  and  the  Atharva Vedas.
IVIetrical  Texts  : — For  ten  consecutive  days, the  room  of  the  patient  should  be  diligently  fumigated, morning  and  evening,  with  the  fumes  of  mustard, Arishta-leaves,  clarified-butter  and  salt  made  into  a kind  of  incense  stick.
Drugs  such  as  Chhatra,  Atichhatra,  Languli,  Jatil^, Bramhacharini,  Lakshmi,  Guh^^  Atiguha,  Shata-viryaya, Sahasra-viryaya  and  white  mustard  seeds  should  be placed  on  the  head  of  the  patient.
Metrical  Texts  :— The  patient  should  be fanned  with  blowing  chowries  so  that  the  ulcer may  not  be  in  any  way  thrashed  or  lacerated during  the  fanning.  The  ulcer  should  not  be scratched  or  pressed.  The  patient  should  be  carefully watched,  while  asleep.  Demons,  that  get  abroad  in  the night,  fly  from  the  presence  of  an  ulcer-patient  pro- tected as  above,  as  herds  of  deer  fly  from  the  forest where  lions  are  found.  •
Regimen  of  diet  and  conduct  :—  An
ulcer-patient   living   on   a   diet   consisting   of  old   and
igo  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  XIX.
boiled  Shall  rice,  not  extremely  liquefied,  and treated  with  clarified-butter,  and  taken  with  the cooked  meat  of  animals  of  the  J^ngala  species,  soon gets  rid  of  his  disease.  A  diet  consisting  of  boiled  rice, the  pot-herbs  known  as  the  Tanduliyakam,  Jivanti, Sunishannaka,  V^stuka,  immatme  Mulaka,  Vartaku, Patola  and  K^ravella,  fried  with  Saindhava  (rock-salt) and  clarified-butter,  and  seasoned  with  the  expressed Juice  of  Dhadima  and  Amalakam,  or  of  Mudga  soup treated  as  above,  should  be  prescribed  for  the  patient. Barley  powder,  Vilepi,  Kulm^sha  and  boiled  water, should  be  likewise  given  to  the  patient  for  food and  drink.  Fatigue  or  physical  exercise  causes the  ulcer  to  swell,  while  the  keeping  of  late  hours increases  the  local  redness.  A  sleep  during  the  day under  the  circumstance  would  give  rise  to  pain  in  the affected  part,  while  a  coitus  may  bring  on  the  death of  the  patient.
An  ulcer-patient,  not  given  to  sleep  in  the  day, and  ^ing  in  a  room  protected  from  gusts  of  wind, and  strictly  following  the  instructions  of  his  physician, (surgeon)  is  healed  in  the  course  of  a  very  short  time and  will  enjoy  a  long  life  through  the  observance  of the  abovesaid  regimen  of  diet  and  conduct.  This  is  the dictum  of  Dhanvantari.
Thus  ends  the  nineteenth  Chapter  of  the  SutrasthSnam  in  the    Sushruta SamhitS  which  treats  of  the  nursing  or  management  of  an  ulcer-patient.
CHAPTER    XX.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  treats  of the  salutary  and  non- salutary  effects  of  regimen,  etc. (H  ita'h  itiya-  madhyayam) .
According  to  certain  eminent  medical  authorities,  an article  or  a  substance  which  is  beneficial  in  derange- ments of  the  bodily  Vayu  may  prove  positively  injuri- ous in  a  Pittaja  affection  ;  hence  it  is  impossible to  name  an  article  or  substance  which  is  absolutely or  universally  wholesome  (^irrespective  of  the  nature and  type  of  a  disease,  and  of  the  deranged  bodily humours  involved  therein}.
But  we  cannot  subscribe  to  the  foregoing  hy- pothesis, since  by  nature  or  combination,  things (substances  are,  or  become  endued  with  properties, which  prove  absolutely  beneficial  or  unconditionally harmful  or  exert  a  mixed  virtue  (both  beneficial  and injurious)  according  to  the  difference  in  the  natu^  and type  of  the  disease  in  which  they  are  employed.  Things or  articles  such  as,  clarified- butter,  water,  milk  and boiled-rice,  etc.  may  be  denominated  as  absolutely beneficial  owing  to  their  congeniality  to,  or  natural suitableness  to  the  human  organism.
Similarly,  substances  such  as  fire,  alkali  and  poison, may  be  designated  as  unconditionally  harmful  in  virtue
184  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [Chap.  XX.
of  their  burning,  suppurating  lit  :  boiling)  and  fatal effect  upon  the  organic  bodies  in  general.  A  substance, which  is  innocuous  by  nature,  may  prove  equally  injuri- ous as  any  active  poison  through  an  injudicious  or incompatible  combination  ;  whereas  a  substance  or  an article,  which  proves  beneficial  in  a  derangement  of  the Vayu,  ma}^  prove  otherwise  in  a  disorder  of  the  Pittam.
Articles  or  substances  which  may  be  safel}'-  included within  the  food  stuffs  of  all  human  beings  are  the  mem- bers of  the  group  Varga)  known  as  the  red  Shali,  the Shastika,  the  Kanguka,  the  Mukundaka,  the  Panduka, the  Pitaka,  the  Pramodaka,  the  Kalaka,  the  Ashanaka, the  Pushpaka,  the  Karddamaka,  the  Shakunahrita,  the Sugandhaka,  the  Kalama,  the  Nivara,  the  Kodrava  the Uddalaka,  the  Shy^maka,  the  Godhuma  and  the  Venn, etc.,  as  well  as  the  flesh  of  the  Ena,  the  Harina  (copper coloured  deer),  the  Kuranga,  the  Mriga,  the  Mriga- matrika,  the  Shvadanstra,  the  Karala,  the  Krakara, the  Kapota  (pigeon),  the  Lava,  the  Tittiri,  the Kapinjala,  the  Varttira,  and  the  Varttika,  and  such  like beasts  and  birds.  The  varieties  of  pulse  which  form the  articles  of  human  food  are  known  as  the  Mudga, the  Vana-Mudga,  the  Makushtha,  the  Kalaya,  the Masura,  the  Mangalya,  the  Chanaka,  the  Harenu,  the the  Adhaki  and  the  Satina.  Similarly,  the  different species  of  pot-herbs,  which  may  be  safely  used  by  a  man to  give  a  greater  relish  to  his   food,  are  named   as  the
Chap.  XX.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 85
Chilli,  the  V^stuka,  the  Sunishannaka  the  Jivanti,  the Tanduliyaka,  and  the  Mandukaparni,  etc.  Clarified- butter,  the  salt  known  as  the  Saindhava,  and  the luscious  juice  of  the  pomegranate  and  the  Amalakam, should  be  generally  deemed  the  most  wholesome  articles of  food.
Similarly,  the  practise  of  self-control,  residence  in  a room  protected  from  the  strong  gusts  of  wind,  sleeping only  at  night,  tepid  water,  and  moderate  physical  exercise should  be  regarded  as  absolutely  conducive  to  a  better preservation  of  health.
We  have  already  enumerated  the  names  of  sub- stances which  are  absolutely  beneficial  or  uncondi- tionally injurious  to  human  health.  Things  which  are both  wholesome  and  injurious  are  those,  which,  for example,  may  prove  beneficial  in  a  distemper  of the  bodily.  Vayu  though  otherwise  in  a  Pittaj a  affec- tion. The  Valli  fruit,  the  Karaka,  the  Karira,  the Amla-phala,  the  salt,  the  Kulattha,  the  Pinyaka,  curd, oil,  Virohi,  cakes,  the  dried  pot-herbs,  goat's  flesh,  mutton, wine,  the  Jamboline  fruit,  the  Chilichima  fish,  the  flesh of  the  Godha,  and  the  Varaha  (wild  boar)  being  eaten simultaneousl)^  with  milk,  furnish  an  example  of  articles which  may  act  as  deadly  poisons  through  incompatible combinations.
Metrical  Texts:— An     intelligent    physician, considering  the  nature  of  the  disease,  the  strength  and 24
1 86  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  XX.
temperament  of  the  patient,  and  the  state  of  his  diges- tion as  well  as  the  seat  of  the  affection,  the  physical features  of  the  country  and  the  then  prevailing  season of  the  year,  should  prescribe  a  diet  which  he  thinks the  most  proper  and  suitable  to  the  requirements  of the  case.  Since  the  conditions  infinitely  vary  in  the different  types  of  diseases  and  even  the  same  conditions do  not  obtain  in  one  and  the  same  type,*  physicians generally  prescribe  a  diet  of  their  own  selection,  one determined  with  regard  to  its  general  effect  on  health,  in preference  to  one  that  has  been  laid  down  in  books of  medicine.
If  asked  to  prescribe  either  milk  or  poison  to  a healthy  person,  a  physician  would  naturally  prescribe the  former,  and  thereby,  prove  the  absolute  wholesome- ness  of  milk  and  unconditional  harmfulness  of  poison. Thus  is  verified,  Sushruta,  the  correctness  of  the  dic- tum, that  things  such  as  water,  etc.,  are  absolutely and  unconditionally  wholesome  or  otherwise,  by  virtue of  their  respective  natural  properties.
Things  which  are  unwholesome through  combination  : — Now  I  shall  enu- merate the  names  of  substances  which  become  positively unwholesome  through  incompatible  combinations.    The
*  The  propriety  and  improprietyof  a  particular  diet  should  be  deter- mined with  a  full  regard  to  the  antecedent  and  attending  circumstances of  a  particular  malady.
Chap.  XX.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  1 87
flesh  of  any  domestic  (Gramya)  or  aquatic  (Anupa) beast  or  bird,  as  well  as  the  flesh  of  those  which  live  in marshy  ground  (Audaka),  should  not  be  eaten  with boiled  rice  prepared  from  paddy  which  has  com- menced sprouting,  or  with  lard,  honey,  milk,  treacle or  Masha-pulse.  The  pot-herbs,,  known  as  the Rohini  and  the  J4tu-shaka,  should  not  be  partaken of  in  combination  with  milk  and  honey  ;  nor  the flesh  of  a  heron,  eaten  simultaneously  with  Kulm^sha and  the  spirituous  liquor  known  as  V^runi.  Maricha (black  pepper)  and  Pippalis  should  not  be  eaten  in combination  with  the  pot-herbs  known  as  the  Kakam^chi. The  pot-herbs  known  as  the  Nadima  and  Siddhi  should not  be  simultaneously  eaten  with  curd,  and  the  flesh  of a  cock.  Honey  should  not  be  taken  immediately  after drinking  warm  water,  nor  meat  and  bile  should be  simultaneouly  eaten.  Sura  (wine),  Krishara  and Payasa  should  not  be  taken  in  combination.  Similarly, Souviraka  and  sesamum  paste,  fish  and  modifications of  sugarcane  juice,  treacle  and  Kdkam^chi,  honey and  Mulakam,  treacle  and  the  flesh  of  a  wild  boar, or  honey  and  boar's  flesh  should  not  be  taken  in combination.
Similarly,  milk  and  Mulakam,  mango  fruit  and Jamboline  fruit  and  the  flesh  of  Godh^,  Porcupine  and hog  should  not  be  eaten  together.  All  fish,  specially those  of  the  Chilichimi  species,  should  not  be  taken  with
1 88  I'HE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [Chap.  XX.
milk,  nor  the  fruit  of  a  plantain  tree  should  be  simulta- neously eaten  with  Tila  fruit,  milk  or  whey.  The  fruit known  as  Lakucha  should  not  be  taken  with  milk,  curd or  meat  soup,  nor  with  honey  and  clarified-butter,  nor immediately  before  or  after  the  drinking  of  milk.
I  ncompatible  preparations  of  food:—
Now  we  shall  enumerate  the  names  of  sub- stances, which  become  unwholesome  through  incom- patible preparations.  Flesh  of  pigeon  fried  with  mustard oil  should  not  be  eaten.  The  flesh  of  a  Kapinjala, Myura  (peacock,  L^va,  Tittira,  and  Godha,  boiled with  castor  oil  and  on  a  fire  of  the  twigs  of  castor plants,  should  not  be  eaten.  Clarified-butter,  kept in  a  vessel  of  Indian  bell  metal  for  ten  consecutive days,  should  be  rejected  as  unwholesome.  Honey should  not  be  used  in  combination  with  an  article or  substance  heated  by  fire,  nor  in  the  seasons  of spring  and  autumn.  The  pot-herbs  known  as  the Kakam^chi,  boiled  in  a  bowl  in  which  fish  or  ginger had  been  previously  boiled  or  prepared,  should  be rejected  as  positively  injurious.
Similarly,  the  pot-herbs  known  as  the  Upodika should  not  be  eaten  by  boiling  them  with  the  levigated paste  of  sesamum.  The  flesh  of  a  heron  prepared with  hog's  lard  should  not  be  taken  with  the  pulp of  the  cocoanut  fruit.  The  flesh  of  a  Bhasa  bird,  roasted on  a  spit  over  a  charcoal  fire,  should  not  be  eaten.
Chap.  XX.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
189
Objectionable  proportions  :— Now  we
shall  enumerate  the  names  of  substances  which  become unwholesome  by  being  mixed  in  objectionable  pro- portions. Two  oily  substances  (such  as  oil  and clarified  butter)  or  honey  and  any  of  the  oily substances,  mixed  in  equal  proportions,  should  not  be taken  ;  nor  should  rain  water  be  drunk  immediately after  having  taken  honey  and  clarified-butter.
Incompatible  tastes,  potencies  and chemical  actions  :— Now  we  shall  describe the  substances  enumerated  in  couples,  and  possessed  of different  tastes,  which  prove  incompatible  to  each other  through  their  respective  tastes,  potencies  and chemical  actions  Vipaka).  Sweet  and  acid  tastes, or  sweet  and  saline  tastes  should  be  deemed  incom- patible to  each  other  in  respect  of  their  potencies  and inherent  properties.  Sweet  and  acrid  tastes  are  incom- patible to  each  other  in  all  the  above  three  respects.
Similarly,  sweet  and  bitter,  or  sweet  and  astringent things  should  be  deemed  incompatible  to  each  other  in respect  of  their  tastes,  and  chemical  action.  Acid  and sahne  things  are  incompatible  to  each  other  as  regards their  flavours.  Acid  and  acrid  things  are  incompatible as  regards  flavour  and  chemical  action.  Acid  and bitter,  or  acid  and  astringent  things,  are  incompatible to  each  other,  both  as  regards  their  respective  flavours, potencies,   and   digestive   or  chemical   transformations.
IQO  THE   SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  XX.
Saline  and  pungent  things  are  incompatible  to  each other  as  regards  their  respective  flavour  (Rasa)  and digestive  (chemical)  transformation.
Similarly,  saline  and  bitter  things  or  saline  and astringent  things  are  incompatible  to  each  other in  respect  of  all  the  three  abovesaid  relations  and  cate- gories. Pungent  and  bitter  tastes  are  incompatible to  each  other  in  respect  of  flavour  and  digestive transformation,  whereas  substances  of  pungent  and astringent  or  bitter  and  astringent  tastes  are  in- compatible to  one  another  as  regards  their  re- spective potencies,  flavours  and  digestive  chemical) action  or  transformation.
Degrees  of  incompatibility  :  -Sub- stances that  are  incompatible  with,  or  antagonistic  to,  the system  through  a  difference  of  degree  or  intensity,  as well  as  things  which  bring  about  an  extreme  dryness of  the  organism,  or  those  which  are  extremely  oily  in their  composition  or  are  characterised  by  extreme cold  or  warmth,  should  be  categorically  rejected.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject :— Things  or  substances  which  are  incompatible to  one  another  in  their  respective  tastes,  potencies  and reactionary  transformation  should  be  denied  as  abso- lutely unwholesome,  while  the  rest  should  be  consi- dered  as   possessed   of  mixed   virtues   ^wholesome    or
1
Chap.  XX.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  191
injurious  under    certain     circumstances'     as    described before.
By  taking  substances  which  are  incompatible  to  one another  as  regards  their  tastes,  potencies  and  digestive transformation,  a  greed}^  and  intemperate  person becomes  afflicted  with  disease  and  weakness  of  the sense-organs,  and  ultimately  meets  with  his  doom.
Anything,  which  being  taken  enrages  or  agitates  the bodily  humours  without  causing  the  assimilated  food ( effete  matter)  to  be  evacuated  out  of  the  bowels,  or  is possessed  of  a  taste  contrary  to,  or  other  than  what  is necessary  for  the  purposes  of  vitalization,  should  be looked  upon  as  the  primary  source  of  all  bodily  dis- tempers.
Diseases,  brought  about  by  a  food  or  drink  composed of  incompatible  substances,  are  amenable  to  the  use  of purgatives,  emetics,  or  pacifying  (corrective  of  the deranged  humours)  medicines  ;  and  such  a  diet,  even when  found  unavoidable,  should  be  preceded  by  the  use of  drugs  or  substances  potent  enough  to  neutralise  its baneful  effect.*
A  meat,  in  the  composition  of  which  substances  of incompatible  virtues  and  potencies  largely  enter,  fails  to develop  any  distressing  or  harmful  symptoms  in  subjects who  are  habitually   addicted  to  it,  or  who  takes   it   in
*    This  couplet  occurs  also  in  the  Charaka  Samhita.
192  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA'.         [  Chap.  xx.
small  quantities,  as  well  as  in  persons  of  youthful  vigor and  strong  iappetite,  or  in  those  who  have  become invigorated  by  the  use  of  oily  and  albuminous  food  and healthful  physical  exercise.*
The  effects  of  the  winds  :— Now  we  shall describe  the  effects  of  the  winds  on  the  body,  (as  they blow  from  the  dfferent  quarters  of  the  heaven) .
The  East  wind  :— The  East  wind,  which  is  cool and  sweet  in  its  potency,  is  heavy  and  charged  with  salt; it  aggravates  blood  and  Pittam  and  gives  rise  to  an  acid digestive  reaction.  It  specially  aggravates  the  disease in  a  patient  suffering  from  a  wound  or  an  ulcer,  or  from the  effect  of  any  poison,  and  affects  persons  of  Shleshmdla temperament.  It  is  highly  efficacious  to  fatigued persons,  as  well  as  to  those  of  a  Vatala  (nervous)  tem- perament, or  who  are  afflicted  with  any  sort  of  Kaphaja disease  ;  though  it  increases  the  slimy  secretion  in  their ulcers  if  there  be  any.
The  South  wind  : — The  South  wind  is  light, sweet  ('produces  the  same  soothing  effect  on  the organism  like  a  thing  of  sweet  taste)  and  is  followed  by an  astringent  after-taste  (Anurasa)  being  antacid  in  its reaction.  It  is  the  best  of  winds,  gives  vigour  to  the eyes,  increases  the  strength,  and  soothes  the  blood  and the  Pittam  without  aggravating  the  bodily  Vayu.
'     Different  Reading—In  a  child  or  in  a  man  of  voracious  appelitc.
Chap.  XX.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
193
The  West  wind  :— The  West  wind  is  pure, non- slimy,  dry,  rough  to  the  perception,  and  keen.  It absorbs  the  albumen  or  oily  principle  of  the  body.  It absorbs  or  dries  up  fat  and  Kapham,  produces  a parched  condition  in  the  body  when  exposed  to  it, and  speedily  diminishes  the  strength  of  a  person.
The  North  wind  :— The  North  wind  is  cold, crisp,  mild,  of  a  sweet  taste  terminating  in  an  astringent one.  It  does  not  in  any  way  enrage  or  agitate  the deranged  bodily  humours.  In  healthy  subjects  it increases  the  strength  and  the  running  secretions  from the  different  orfices  of  the  body  (such  as  the  nostrils etc.).  It  proves  extremely  salutary  to  patients  suffering from  consumption,  cachexia  and  the  effects  of  poison.
Tims    ends  the  twentieth    Ch.ipter  of  (he    .Siitiasthanrtiii  in    the.Sushiuia sanihila  wliich  iieals  (if  snlutarx'  and  nonsnlutai^-  efiVrts  of  the  reginien.
25
CHAPTER     XXI.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  Chapter  which  investigates the  nature  of  bodily  humours,  as  exciting  causes  of ulcers  (Vrana-prashna-madhyayam).
The  Vayu,  Pittam  and  Shleshma  should  be  considered as  the  primary  and  the  most  essential  factors  in  the  con- stitution of  human  organism.  These  fundamental  and vital  humours,  occupying  respectively  the  lower,  middle, and  upper  parts  of  the  body,  maintain  its  integrity.  The human  body  is  supported  by  the  three  fundamental humours  in  the  same  way  as  a  dwelling  house  is propped  up  by  three  supporting  poles  or  stays  ;  from which  fact,  the  body  is  called  the  three-supported  one (Tristhunam)  by  certain  authorities.  A  deranged  con- dition of  these  three  fundamental  humours  may  bring about  its  dissolution  or  death,  while  on  their  con- tinuance in  a  normal  state  depends  the  vitality  of  the organism.  These  three  humours,  in  combination  with  a fourth,  the  principle  of  blood,  determine  the  origin, preservation,  and  dissolution  of  animated  organism  and permeate  it  with  their  respective  properties  till  the moment  of  death.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — There  can  be  no  organism  without  Vdyu, Pittam,  Kapham    and   blood,   which   are   necessary  to
Chap.  XXI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  195
constantly  maintain  its  integrity.  The  terms  Vata (Vayu),  Pittam  and  Shleshma  (Kaphami  are  respec- tively derived  from  the  roots  'Va',  to  move  or  smell, '  Tapa,'  to  burn  or  to  heat,  and  "  Shlisha,"  to  embrace, with  the  suffix  'Ta'  thereto  added.*
Seats   of  the  bodily  humours :— Now
we  shall  describe  the  locations  of  the  foregoing  vital  hu- mours. The  Vaj'^u  may  be  briefly  described  as  located in  the  regions  of  the  pelvis  (Shroni),  and  the  rectum (Guda  .  The  Pittam  has  its  seat  in  the  region  between the  stomach  1  Amashaya)  and  the  intestines  (Pakvashaya) which  is  above  the  pelvis  and  the  rectum  and  below the  umbilicus,  while  the  Kapham  is  ensconced  within the  cavity  of  the  stomach  (Amashaya. j
Xow  we  shall  divide  the  locations  of  each  of  the vital  humours  into  five  parts  : — The  five  localities  of the  Vayu  will  be  described  under  the  head  of  Vata- Vyadhis  (nervous  diseases),  while  those  of  Pittam  are  the liver  and  the  spleen,  the  heart,  the  pupils  of  the  eyes, the  skin  and  the  intestines  (Pakvashaya\  The  Kapham is  located  in  the  region  of  the  breast,  the  throat,  the head,  the  joints  and  the  stomach  (Amashaya).  The  fore- going regions  are  the  seats  of  the  vital  humours  in  their normal  state.
*  From  this  shiiuld  he  infenetl  that  niotion  and  sim-ll  arc  ilic  nalural allriljutes  of  ihe  viud  \^yu,  heal  and  ImininL;  arc  lliosc  uf  I'iUam,  and union  and  inlegraliun  arc  iho.sc  of  Kapham.
196  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.  xxi.
IVIetrical  Texts  :— The  vital  humours  ^Vayu, Pittam  and  Kapham  maintain  the  integrity  of  the animated  organism  by  creating,  assimilating  and diffusing  strength  in  the  same  way  as  the  moon,  the  sun, and  the  winds  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  terrestrial globe.*
The  Pittam  :— Now  it  may  be  asked  whether the  Pittam  is  identical  with  the  elemental  fire,  or  is  it something  other  than  that  ?  The  question  may  be answered  by  stating  that  the  Pittam  is  the  same  as fire.  Since  such  symptoms,  as  a  burning  sensation, digestion  (boiling ,  and  all  other  characteristics  of  fire can  never  exhibit  themselves  in  the  human  body  with- out the  intervention  of  Pittam.  Pittam  therefore  is  called internal  fire.t
Consequently,  an  enfeebled  action  of  Pittam  is  re- medied by  the  administration  of  drugs  and  substances which  are  akin  to  the  elemental  fire  in  their  attributes, while  an  abnormal  or  excessive  action  (secretion)  of Pittam  is  subdued  by  cooling  measures  as  an  over- kindled  fire  is  subdued  by  moisture.  There  is  no  other fire  (heat  making  factor)  in  the  organism  than  Pittam.
*  The  moon  laves  the  ea.rlh  and  imparls  lo  it  the  vitaHsing  principle with  her  own  ambrosial  lii^ht.  The  sun  draws  off  the  moisture  in  virtue of  his  own  attractive  force,  and  the  Vdyu  distributes  the  heal  and  moisture over  its  surface.
t  The  analogy  is  based  on  the  healing  (and  metabolic)  actions  of Pittam,  and  does  not  extend  to  its  liquid  secreli<jn  ,'bile).  Bui  since  the former  attributes    permeate  in  its  entirety,  it  is  designated  the  Inlernal  fire-
Chap.  XXI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  1^7
The  Pd'Chakygni  :— By  the  ordination  of  fate or  necessity  (unfathomable  natural  cause \  the  Pittam, located  in  the  region  between  the  stomach  (Am^shaya  < and  the  intestines  (Pakvashaya),  helps  the  digestion of  the  four  kinds  of  food  such  as  drink  and  edibles etc.  1  partaken  of  by  a  living  subject,  and  purges  off  the residue  or  impure  morbiferous  matter  in  the  shape  of urine  and  excreta  after  the  completion  of  the  process. Even  thus  located,  it  keeps  up  the  temperature  in its  other  distant  locations  (skin,  etc.)  in  virtue  of  its native  heat-giving  attribute.  Hence  this  Pittam  is called  the  Pachakagni  (digestive  fire  or  heat)  in  an animated  organism.
The  Ranjaka'gni  :— The  function  of  the Pittam,  which  has  its  seats  in  the  liver  and  the  spleen, consists  in  imparting  its  characteristic  pigment  ( Ragakrit  i to  the  lymph-chyle  and  is  hence  known  as  Ranjakagni (lit  : — dyeing  fire  or  pigment  bile.)
The  Sa'dhaka'gni  :— The  Pittam  seated  in  the heart  is  denominated  as  the  Sadhakagni  (performing or  operating  heat  or  fire;  inasmuch  as  its  action is  to  bring  about  the  fruition  or  realisation  of one's  desires.
The  Alochaka'gni  :— The  Pittam,  which  is located  in  the  pupils  of  the  eyes,  is  called  the  Alocha- kagni  (the  Pittam  or  fire   of  sight)  as  its   office  is  to
igS  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.  XXI.
catch  the  image   of  any   external   object  presented  to the  e5'es.
The  Bhrarjaka'gni  :-The  Pittam,  which  has its  seat  in  the  skin,  is  called  the  Bhrajakagni  (illuminat- ing or  irradiating  heat)  inasmuch  as  it  absorbs  the substances  used  in  the  shape  of  imguents.  lubrications, etc.  and  irradiates  the  glow  of  one's  natural  complexion.
IVIetrical  texts  :-The  Pittam  is  a  keen,  sharp and  warm  liquid,  of  a  blue  colour  (in  its  normal  state), or  yellowish  (in  its  deranged  condition).  It  emits  a kind  of  fleshy  smell  and  is  possessed  of  a  pungent  taste which  is  transformed  into  an  acid  one  when  deranged  or vitiated.
Seats  of  Shiesh ma'  Kapham  :— Xow  we shall  describe  the  locations  of  Kapham.  The  stomach (Amashaya),  which  is  the  seat  of  Kapham,  occupies  the same  position  as  regards  its  location  to  that  of  Pittam as  the  sun  holds  in  relation  to  that  of  the  moon.  And since  the  stomach  (Amashaya;  is  situated  above  the pancreas  (Pittashaya^-,  and  is  endowed  with  a  property (cooling)  contrary  to  the  primary  virtue  (heating)  of  Pit- tam, and,  since  the  heat  emitted  by  the  receptacle  of  Pit- tam is  naturally  radiated  in  an  upward  direction,  the  four kinds  of  food,  brought  in  to  the  stomach  (Amashaya),  are boiled  and  transformed  into  a  soft  placid  mass  (chyme;, like  rice  boiled   in   a  bowl  full  of  water  placed  over  a
Chap.  XXI.  1  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  1 99
burning  oven.  The  food,  thus  brought  down  into  the stomach,  is  easily  moistene'd,  disintegrated  and  digested by  coming  into  contact  with  the  oily  secretions  of  the stomach  (Amdshaya).
IVIetrical  Texts  :— The  Kapham  is  originated through  the  sweet,  slimy,  watery,  exudating  character of  the  food  brought  into  the  stomach  (Amashaya)  ; and  hence  the  Kapham  becomes  endued  with  similar attributes.
The  Kledakam  :— The  Kapham,  even  though principally  located  in  the  stomach,  permeates  its  four other  distant  localities  with  its  peculiar  watery  or humid  essence  in  virtue  of  its  inherent  attributes.
The  Avalamvaka  :— The  Kapham,  located  in the  region  of  the  chest,  protects  the  joints  of  the  arms, the  neck  and  the  sternum,  and  enables  the  heart  to perform  its  natural  functions  with  the  help  of  the lymph-chyle  derived  from  the  assimilated  food  and  its own  intrinsic  potency.
The  Vodhakam  :— The  Kapham,  situated  in the  throat  and  at  the  root  of  the  palate,  lends  its  aid  to the  perception  of  tastes  by  maintaining  the  moist  or humid  character  of  the  tongue.
The  Tarpakam  :— The  Kapham,  situated  in the   head,  cools  and   bathes   the  different  sense  organs
200  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  XXi.
with   its   own   humid   essence,   in   virtue  of  its  natural humid  attributes.
The  Shimcshakam  :— The  Kapham,  situated in  the  joints,  keeps  them  firmly  united,  protects their  articulation  and  opposes  their  separation  and disunion.
Metrical  Texts  :— The  Kapham  is  white, heavy,  oily,  slimy  and  cool.  In  its  normal  state,  it is  possessed  of  a  sweet  taste,  which  is  followed  by a  saline  one  in  its  reactionary  transformation  (chemical reaction  when  deranged  or  vitiated.
Seats  of  blood  :— The  seats  ot  blood  are in  the  liver  and  the  spleen,  as  stated  before,  whence it  helps  its  other  receptacles  to  serve  their  proper functions.
Metrical  Texts  :— The  blood  is  red,  oily  or glossy,  a  little  warm,  and  is  possessed  of  an  attribute similar  to  something  of  a  sweet  taste.  It  is  heav)',  and it  emits  a  fleshy  smell  and  resembles  the  Pittam  in  its reactionary  process,  or  in  other  words,  those  factors, which  derange  the  Pittam,  vitiate  the  blood  as  well.
These  are  the  locations  of  the  deranged  humours, which  are  respectively  accumulated  in  them  on  account of  the  aforesaid  causes.  The  deranged  humours  exhibit such  symptoms  as,  fullness  and  stuffedness  of  the  abdo- men, or  of  any   of  the  viscera  (due  to  the  action  of  the
Chap.  XXI.  ]  SUTRA8THANAM.  20I
deranged  Vayu  ;  yellowness  of  the  affected  part  (due to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Pittam  ,  and  diminution of  the  bodily  heat,  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  and  a  sense of  languor  .^due  to  the  action  of  the  diseased  Kapham), and  a  natural  repugnance  for  causes  (factors)  which lead  to  their  respective  aggravations  or  accumulations. The  medical  treatment  should  be  commenced  as  soon as  the  symptoms,  peculiar  to  their  accumulation,  would become  manifest.
Humours  and  their  aggravations  :—
Xow  we  shall  enumerate  the  causes  which  agitate  and (aggravate)  the  deranged  humours.  The  bodily  Vayu is  aggravated  by  such  factors  (conduct,  practices  and diet,  etc.)  as,  wrestling  with  a  wrestler  of  superior strength,  violent  gymnastic  exercises,  sexual  excesses, excessive  study,  a  headlong  plunge  into  water  or  a  leap from  an  inordinate  height,  running,  a  violent  pressing blow,  leaping  over  a  ditch,  a  bounding  gait,  swimming, keeping  of  late  hours,  carrj'ing  of  heavy  loads,  excessive riding,  walking  a  long  distance  and  the  partaking of  a  food  into  the  composition  of  which  pungent, astringent,  bitter,  light  or  parchifying  articles,  or  sub- stances of  cool  potency,  largely  enter.  Diets  consisting of  dried  pot-herbs,  Vallura,  Varaka,  Uddalaka,  Kara- dusha,  Shyamaka,  Xiv^ra,  Mudga,  Masura,  Adhaki, Harenu,  Kalaya,  and  Nishpava  tend   to   aggravate   the
bodily  V^yu. 26
202  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.        [  Chap.  XXI.
Fasting,  unequal  or  irregular  meals,  over-eating, voluntary  suppression  of  urine,  semen,  and  tears,  or  of the  mucous  secretions  from  the  nose  as  in  a  fluent coryza,  a  forced  stoppage  of  defecation,  eructation or  sneezing  are  the  factors,  which  may  be  set  down as  the  aggravating  causes  of  the  bodily  Vayu.
Metrical  Text  :— The  bodily  Vayu  is  naturally aggravated  in  a  cold,  cloudy  or  windy  day,  in  winter, during  the  rains,  in  the  morning  and  evening  and especially  at  the  close  of  digestion.
Symptoms  of  aggravated   Pittam  :—
The  Pittam  is  aggravated  by  anger,  grief,  fear,  fatigue, fasting,  acid  transformation  (reaction)  of  the  assimilated food,  or  deficient  gastric  digestion,  unnatural  sexual indulgence,  partaking  of  a  food  consisting  of  pungent, acid  or  saline,  keen,  heat  making  or  light  substances,  as well  as  of  those  whose  digestion  is  followed  by  a reactionary  acidity.  It  is  aggravated  by  the  use  of sesamum  oil,  or  of  sesamum  paste.  Kulattha,  Sarshapa, Atashi,  the  pot-herbs  known  as  Haritaka,  fish,  the flesh  of  a  Godha  or  a  goat  or  mutton  may  lead  to its  aggravation,  if  taken  iniudiciously.
Similarly,  the  use  of  curd,  whey,  Kurchika,  (in- spissated milk),  Sauviraka,  different  kinds  of  wine, Amla-phala  (sour  fruits),  or  Katvara  i.curd  mixed  with oil)  and  excessive  exposure  to  the  sun,  may  be  followed by  the  same  consequences.
Chap.  XXI.  1  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  203
Metrical  Texts  :— In  addition  to  all  these, the  Pittam  is  spontaneously  and  abnormally  aggravated in  summer,  in  autumn,  at  noon,  at  mid-night  and during  the  process  of  digestion,  as  well  as  by  the partaking  of  hot  or  warm  substances.
Symptoms  of  the  deranged  Ka- pham  : — The  deranged  Kapham  is  aggravated  by sleep  in  the  day  time,  or  b}'  the  following  of  lazy  or sedentary  habits.  The  partaking  of  food,  composed of  substances  which  are  heav)',  slimy,  sweet,  acid or  saline  in  their  taste,  or  of  one  consisting  of  substances which  increase  the  mucous  secretions  from  the  fissures of  the  body^  ma}'  be  likewise  set  down  as  aggra- vating factors.  The  use  of  food  grains,  which  are called  the  Hayanaka,  the  Yavaka,  the  Naishadha, the  Itcata,  the  Masha,  the  Mahamasha,  the  Godhuma, the  Tilam,  or  of  rice  cakes  ma}--  lead  to  its  aggravation. Curd,  milk,  the  Krishara,  the  Payasha  (sweetened  rice porridge^  the  various  preparations  of  cane-sugar  are things  which  produce  the  same  result.  The  flesh  of beasts  and  birds  that  are  aquatic  in  their  habits  or  live in  swampy  lands,  as  well  as  lard,  have  the  same  effect, if  used  as  food.  The  use  of  bulbs  and  lotus  stems or  of  Kasheruka,  Shringataka,  Madhura-phala,  Valli- phala  as  well  as  eating  before  digestion  or  the  par- taking of  food  consisting  of  both  wholesome  and  un- wholesome substances  may  aggravate  this  bodily  humour.
204  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XXI.
lYIetrlcal  Texts  :— The  Kapham  is  naturally and  spontaneoush'  aggravated  in  the  morning  and evening,  in  Hemanta,  and  specially  in  Spring,  and  just after  a  meal.  Likewise,  it  is  aggravated  by  the  use  of cold  food  or  drink,  etc.
Symptoms  of  the  aggravated blood: — [Owing  to  a  natural  similarity  between  blood and  the  Pittam,  and  through  a  natural  affinity  between their  attributes],  causes,  which  tend  to  aggravate  the deranged  Pittam,  tend  to  aggravate  or  agitate  the  blood as  well.  Moreover,  frequent  meals  or  repeated  use  of food,  into  the  composition  of  which  cool,  liquid  and heavy  substances  largely  enter,  are  followed  by  a  dis- turbed or  aggravated  condition  of  the  blood.  Sleep  in the  day  time,  anger,  exposure  to  the  glare  of  the  sun or  fire,  over- fatiguing  labour,  an  external  blow,  ingestion of  indigestible  or  incompatible  substances,  and  eating before  the  full  digestion  of  a  previous  meal,  may  as well  be  set  down  as  causes  which  tend  to  aggravate blood.
IVIetrical  Texts:— As  the  bodily  humours  are never  aggravated  independently  of  the  blood,  their aggravation  goes  together  with  a  disturbed  or  agitated condition  of  the  blood.  The  aggravated  condition  of  the humours  gives  rise  to  pain  and  moves  the  wind  A'ayu) in  the  bowels  ;  it  further  occasions  acid  eructations, thirst,  burning  sensations,   aversion   to   food,   vomiting
Chap   XXI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.
205
and  nausea.     Any  of  these  symptoms  should  be  regard- ed as  the  second  occasion  which  calls  for  medical  aid.
Expansion  of  the  deranged  hu- mours : — Now  we  shall  describe  the  expansion (Prasaram)  of  the  deranged  humours.  The  deranged humours,  aggravated  b}-  the  above  mentioned  causes, expand  and  overflow  the  limits  of  their  respective localities  in  the  same  manner  as,  cakes,  soaked  in any  ferment  or  enzyme  and  kept  standing  over night,  ferment  and  rise  through  the  acquisition of  new  and  unseen  attributes.  The  V^yu,  which is  possessed  of  locomotion  or  extreme  mobility,  should be  looked  upon  as  the  cause  of  their  expansion or  over-flowing.  The  Vayu,  though  an  inanimate  thing, in  reality  is  possessed  of  the  quality  of  "Rajas" (creative  or  cohesive  energ}'),  and  the  qualit}'  of  the Rajas  is  the  only  essential  or  motive  principle  in  the universe.
As  a  vast  and  mighty  expanse  of  water,  which has  been  divided  into  two  expanses  by  a  dam  or barrier,  will  sweep  away  the  latter  and  unite  again to  form  one  sheet  of  water  ;  so  the  deranged  humours, sometimes  singly,  sometimes  in  combination  with  two or  all  of  their  species,  or  in  unison  with  blood,  expand and  over-run  the  organism  in  all  directions.  As  for example,  the  Vayu,  the  Pittam,  the  Kapham  and the    blood   are   singlv    expanded,   whereas  the   bi-hu-
2o6  THE   SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  xxi.
moural  expansions  involve  the  simultaneous  overflow of  the  two  deranged  humours,  or  of  any  deranged humour  and  blood,  as  the  Vayu  and  Pittam,  Vayu  and Kapham,  Vayu  and  blood,  Pittam  and  blood,  and Kapham  and  blood.  The  tri-humoural  expansions, which  involve  the  blood  and  any  two  of  the  deranged and  enraged  humours,  may  be  classified  as  the  expansion, of  fi)  the  Vayu,  Pittam  and  blood,  {2)  the  expansion  of the  Vayu,  Kapham  and  blood,  (3)  the  expansion  of Pittam,  Kapham  and  blood,  (4)  the  expansion  of  Vayu, Pittam  and  Kapham,  (5,1  the  expansion  of  Pittam, Kapham  and  blood,  the  different  types  of  expansion numbering  fifteen  in   all.
Metrical  Texts:— The  aggravated,  or  the abnormally  irritated  deranged  humours,  whether  per- meating the  whole  or  half  of  the  system  or  restricted to  any  particular  part  or  member  of  the  body,  give  rise to  disease  in  the  place  of  their  incarceration,  like  rain clouds  pouring  down  in  the  quarter  of  the  sky  where they  are  formed.  The  deranged  humours,  not  excessively slightly;  aggravated,  lie  inoperative  coating  the  internal passages  (Margas)  of  the  body  and  thus  bring  about  a fresh  disease,  if  subsequent!}'  agitated  by  any  disturbing causes.
The  deranged  and  aggravated  Vayu,  ha\ing  moved into  any  specific  seat  of  Pittam,  should  be  medicinally treated  as  a  case  of  Pittaja  aggravation.     Similarly,- the
[Chap.  XXI.  SUTRASTHANAM.  207
deranged  and  aggravated  Pittam,  or  Kapham,  changing their  respective  places  with. each  other,  should  be  medi- cinally treated  as  the  humour  in  whose  location  it  is lound.  The  Vayu,  thus  aggravated  and  expanded,  tends to  deviate  from  its  right  passage  and  gives  rise  to  a swelling  or  distention  of  the  abdomen,  accompanied  by a  rumbling  sound  in  the  intestines.  The  Pittam,  under the  similar  condition,  gives  rise  to  heat,  and  a  sort  of sucking,  burning  pain  in  the  affected  part,  together  with a  sensation  of  radiation  or  evaporation  of  heat  from  its surface.  The  Kapham,  under  the  circumstance,  would usher  in  a  complete  aversion  to  food,  inertness  of  the limbs,  ^•omiting  and  impaired  digestion.  The  preceding symptoms,  caused  by  the  aggravation  and  expansion of  the  bodily  humours,  should  be  the  third  occasion for  medical  treatment
Stha'na-Samshrayam  :— Now  we  shall enumerate  the  names  of  the  peculiar  diseases,  which  are originated  by  the  deranged  and  expanded  humours, incarcerated  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body. These  humours,  confined  in  the  abdomen,  give  rise  to Gulma  abdominal  glands)  tumours,  internal  abscesses (Vidradhi),  abdominal  dropsy,  impaired  digestion in  the  bowels,  constipation  (Anaha',  cholera  fVisu- chikai  and  dysentery.
Lodged  in  the  bladder,  these  humours  usher  in Prameha  (morbid  urethral  discharges),  Ashman  (stone  in
2o8  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XXI.
the  bladder),  Mutrakrichchhra  (stricture  of  the  urethra) and  Mutraghata  'retention  of  urine),  and  diseases affecting  the  renal  secretion,  etc.  Restricted  to  the penis  they  tend  to  bring  in  syphilis,  Xirudha-prakasha (phymosis  and  the  local  inflammatory  diseases known   as   the  Shuka-dosha,  etc.
Similarly,  lodged  in  the  region  of  the  anus,  these deranged  and  expanded  humours  beget  fistula  in  ano, hccmorrhoids  and  polypus  growths  about  that locality.  Confined  in  the  region  of  the  scrotum, they  give  rise  to  hydrocele  and  other  types  of  scrotal tumours,  etc.  Restricted  to  the  region  above  the clavicles,  these  humours  originate  diseases  peculiar  to that  locality,  while  erysipelas,  cutaneous  affections (Kushtha .  and  other  minor  diseases  supervene,  when  they restrict  themselves  to  the  flesh  and  the  skin  (lymph- chyle)  and  blood.  Affecting  only  the  fat,  these humours  tend  to  originate  Granthi  (Aneurism),  Apachi (scrofula),  Arvuda  (tumour',  Galaganda  (goitre)  and  Alaji (inflammation  of  the  eye  at  the   edge    of  the  cornea.*
Lodged  in  the  lower  extremities,  they  bring  on elephantisis,  Vata-Rakta  (a  kind  of  leprosy ,  Vata- Kantaka,  etc.  Permeating  the  whole  organism,  they irive  rise  to  such  diseases  as  fever,  SarAangaroga,  etc. which  invade  the  entire  system.
*  Additional  text:— Reaching  down  and  confined  in  the  bone -systems  of ihe  body,  ihey  produce  Vidradhi  (abscesses),  Anushayi,  cte.
Chap.  XXI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  209
The  aggravated  and  expanded  humours,  thus  firmly ensconced  in  the  different  parts  of  the  body,  exhibit the  premonitor}''  symptoms  of  diseases  which  will  be fully  dealt  with  under  their  respective  heads.  The manifestation  of  these  premonitory  symptoms  should be  considered  as  the  fourth  occasion  for  medical treatment.
Disease- Its     Development  :— Now    we
shall  deal  with  the  full  development  or  manifestation of  a  disease.  The  full  manifestation  of  a  disease,  such  as  a swelling,  tumour,  aneurism  (Granthi),  Vidradhi  (abscess) and  erysipelas  (Visarpa)  etc.,  fever  or  dysentery,  signifies the  complete  development  of  the  characteristic  symp- toms, which  should  be  regarded  as  the  fifth  occasion  for medical  treatment.
The  sixth  occasion  for  the  calling  in  of  medical  aid should  be  considered  to  have  arisen  when  a  swelling (abscess,  tumour,  etc.)  would  burst  and  exhibit  the  charac- teristic symptoms  of  an  open  ulcer.  A  persistent lingering  or  continuance  of  a  fever  or  dysentery,  etc., should  be  considered  as  marking,  or  forming  one  of  its particular  stages,  and  which  may  run  into  one  of  an incurable  type,  if  neglected  or  not  sufficiently  cared  for at  the  outset.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  subject:—
The  physician,  who  fully   knows   about   the  accumula-
2IO
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.  XXI.
tion  (Sanchaya),  disturbance  or  aggravation  rPrakopa}, expansion  ( Prasaram),  and  differentiating  traits  of  the deranged  humours  (Bheda),  and  is  well  conversant  with the  specific  localities  in  which  they  are  respectively confined  in  the  course  of  their  expansion  (Sthana- samshrayam),  and  with  the  symptoms  which  they  respec- tively  exhibit  in  connection  with  the  incidental  disease (Vyakti),  is  alone  worthy  of  that  epithet.
The  deranged  humours,  checked  or  subdued  in  their accumulating  stage,  fail  to  exhibit  any  further  or  subse- quent development,  but,  if  left  unremedied,  they  gain in  strength  and  intensity  in  the  course  of  their  further development.  The  humours,  deranged  either  singly,  or  in couples,  or  in  a  triple  combination  as  regards  one  or  two of  their  virtues,  push  on,  follow  and  blend  with  humours similarly  deranged  as  regards  their  qualities  and  com- binative numbers.
The  medical  treatment  in  a  case,  where  two  or  all (three)  of  the  deranged  humours  are  involved,  consists in  conquering  the  strongest  one  in  the  combination,  but so  as  not  to  enrage  or  aggravate  the  minor  or  the  weaker humours  in  the  group  and  specially  so  in  a  case  of Sannipata."
*  THl- cuniliinaiinii  nfany  iwnot  ihc  IkkIIIv  liuiiKiuis  wiih  the  viiiaied hlond  niav  liki'wisf  Uc  iiiicrpiL-tL-d  in  signify  a  SAnnip^tika  (tiihuninuial) conil.iTiaticin.
Chap.  XXI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  211
A  concourse  of  deranged  humours,  affecting  and  ap- pearing in  a  particular  part  of  the  body,  is  called  a  boil or  an  ulcer  (Vrana)  which  "is  derived  from  the  root "Vri"  to  cover  and  is  so  called  from  the  fact  of  its covering  a  particular  part  of  the  body  or  from  its leaving  a  cicatrix  which  remains  the  whole  life-time of  the  patient.
Thus  ends  ihe  l\vcnl\-Hisl  chapter  uf  the  Sulraslh^nam  in  the  Sushnila Samhili  which  treats  of  investigation  into  the  nature  ol  the  humours  giving rise  to  an  ulcer.
CHAPTER     XXII.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  chapter,  which treats     of     secretions     from      boils      or      ulcers      of
different    types.    (Vranasra'va-Vijna'niaya- madhya'yam).
A  boil  or  an  ulcer  has  its  seat  generally  in  one  of the  eight  following  components  or  principles  of  the body  such  as,  the  bone,  the  skin,  the  flesh,  the  veins, the  ligaments,  the  joints,  the  viscera  and  the  Marmas (vital  parts  of  the  body).  A  boil  or  an  ulcer  of  any type  may  crop  up  or  appear  in  any  one  of  the  above mentioned  localities.
A  boil  or  an  ulcer,  which  is  confined  onl)'  to  the skin,  readily  yields  to  medical  treatment,  while  the remaining  types,  as  well  as  those,  which  spontaneoush' suppurate  and  bursty  are  hard  to  cure.  A  boil  or  an ulcer  usually  assumes  a  shape  which  is  either  diffused^ rectangular,  spheroidal  or  triangular ;  while  those, which  are  irregular  or  indefinite  in  shape,  (or  have  forms other  than  the  preceding  ones  ,  should  be  looked  upon as  belonging  to  types  which  can  be  cured  only  with the  utmost  difficulty.  Any  Vrana  (burst  or  incised abscess)  in  a  patient,  who  observes  a  strict  regimen,  and who,  from  the  outset,  is  placed  under  the  medical  treat- ment of  an  experienced  physician  (surgeon),  will  be speedily  healed  ;   while  an  ulcer,   affecting  a   person    of
Chap.  XXII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  213
irregular  habits  and  treated  by  a  quack  or  an  ignorant physician,  will  dcNelop  into  one  of  a  malignant  type, which  can  be  healed  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty, on  account  of  it  becoming  aggravated  b}'  the  deranged bodily  humours  involved  therein.
Symptoms  of  Dushta-Vranas  :— Malig- nant ulcers  (Dushta  Vranas)  are  known  by  the  following indications  : — They  are  either  too  narrow  or  too  wide- mouthed.  They  feel  either  extremely  hard  or  soft  to  the touch  and  present  either  a  raised  elevated  or  a  de- pressed aspect.  They  are  of  either  a  black  or  red,  yellow or  white  colour,  and  are  characterised  by  extremes of  temperature.  Exhibiting  strange  and  unusual  fea- tures, they  are  checkered  with  networks  of  veins, hgaments,  etc.,  and  are  filled  with  putrid  and  sloughing flesh  and  fetid  pus.  Indefinite  and  irregular  in  shape, they  are  found  to  exude  a  sort  of  dirty,  fetid  pus, which  runs  into  fissures  and  cavities,  following  an oblique  or  upward  course.  They  have  a  cadaverous look  and  smell  and  are  characterised  by  extreme  pain and  burning  sensation,  attended  with  swelling,  redness, itching  and  suppuration.  Pustules  crop  up  round  these ulcers,  which  largely  secrete  vitiated  blood,  and  linger unhealed  for  an  inordinate  length  of  time.
These  ulcers  may  be  divided  into  six  classes  [accord- ing as,  they  are  severally  caused  by  the  deranged bodily  humours   fVayu,   Pittam   and   Kapham),   or  are
214  ^^^  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XXli.
due  to  their  concerted  action  '^Sannip^ta),  or  to  the effects  of  a  blow  (traumatic)  or  to  vitiated  blood.], and  should  be  medically  treated  according  to  the  nature of  their  respective  exciting  factors.
Secretions  from  ulcers  :— Now  we  shall describe  the  characteristic  secretions  from  all  types  of ulcers.  Secretions  from  a  contused  or  lacerated  skin, as  well  as  from  an  ulcer  confined  only  to  it),  whether spontaneously  bursting  or  surgically  opened,  are  thin and  watery  in  their  consistency.  They  are  character- ised by  a  raw  (fleshy)  smell  and  a  yellowish  colour. An  ulcer,  affecting  the  flesh,  exudes  a  slimy,  thick  and white  secretion  like  clarified-butter.  A  copious  quantity of  blood  flows  out  of  a  vein  recently  cut,  while  the incidental  ulcer,  in  its  suppurating  stage,  secretes  a copious  secretion,  like  water  flowing  out  of  a  hydrant, which  is  moreover  detached,  thin,  pendent  (ropy), and  slimy  in  its  character  and  has  a  brown  or  frosty hue.  An  ulcer,  confined  only  to  a  ligament,  secretes a  sort  of  cold  and  thick  secretion,  like  expectorated mucous,  though  sometimes  marked  with  streaks  of blood.
A  bone,  mjured,  tractured,  or  suddenly  cracked  by idiopathic  causes  (derangement  of  the  bodily  humours), loses  its  internal  marrow  and  appears  as  if  washed  (loses its  natural  gloss\  It  assumes  the  colour  of  an  oyster  shell, whereas  the  secretions  from  an  ulcer,  which  is  seated  in
Chap.  XXII.  1  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  215
a  bone,  are  cold  and  marked  b}^  streaks  of  Mood  and lumps  of  marrow.  An  ulcer, 'situated  in  an}'  of  the  bone- joints,  does  not  exude  any  secretion  under  pressure, but  secretes  a  sort  of  slimy,  pendent,  frothy  and  blood- streaked  pus,  when  the  affected  limb  or  part  is  flexed, expanded,  raised  or  lowered,  as  in  running  (moving about),  sitting  or  standing  erect,  or  at  defecation.
An  ulcer,  seated  in  the  abdominal  cavity  (Koshtha), exudes  a  secretion,  which  is  mixed  with  urine,  fecal matter,  pus  or  blood,  and  a  thin  or  watery  (serous) fluid.  The  secretions  from  an  ulcer,  affecting  any  vital part  of  the  body,  need  not  be  separately  described,  as such  a  part  naturally  involves  the  organic  principles  of skin,  flesh,  etc.  ;  and  hence  an  ulcer,  invading  it,  must necessarily  exude  a  secretion,  which  is  peculiar  to  any of  the  aforesaid  bodily  principles  (skin,  flesh,  etc.)  that has  become  affected.
The  deranged  V^yu  makes  the  secretions  from  an ulcer,  seated  in  an}^  of  the  seven  abovesaid  principles such  as,  the  skin,  flesh,  veins,  ligaments,  bones,  joints and  the  abdomen,  respectively  coarse,  and  rough  to the  touch,  brown,  grey,  frosty,  or  white  like  the  cream of  curd,  and  coloured  like  the  washings  of  an  alkali,  like that  of  meat  or  paddy  husks.  Similarly,  the  action  of the  deranged  Pittam  should  be  inferred  from  the  secre- tions assuming  the  colours  of  a  Gomedha  (a  species of   bluish     yellow     agate;,   or  that    of    the     urine   of
2,6  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [Chap.  XXII.
a  cow,  or  that  of  water  saturated  with  the  burnt  ashes of  conch-shells  or  that  of  Kashaya  water  or  that of  the  wine  known  as  the  Madhvika  or  that  of  oil, according  as  the  skin,  flesh,  etc.  are  respectiveh^  affected. The  action  of  the  deranged  blood,  in  changing  the nature  of  the  secretions  of  ulcers  in  the  seven  above- sajd  locations,  is  identical  with  that  of  the  deranged Pittam  with  the  exception,  that  the  secretions  are characterised  by  an  extremel}''  fishy  smell.
In  an  epidermic  (confined  onl}'  to  the  epidermis of  a  part)  or  superficial  ulcer  the  action  of  the deranged  Kapham  manifests  itself  by  imparting  a butter-like  or  a  Kasisha  (sulphate  of  iron)  colour to  the  secretions.  They  have  lard-like  hue  or  a colour  like  that  of  rice  paste,  or  that  of  water  tinged with  sesamum,  or  a  colour  like  that  of  the  internal juice  or  water  of  a  cocoanut,  or  a  colour  like  that  of hog's  lard,  according  as  the  flesh,  a  vein,  a  ligament, a  bone  or  a  joint  is  attacked.  On  the  other  hand, through  the  combined  action  of  all  the  three  deranged humours  of  the  body  (Sannipata),  those  secretions become  coloured  like  the  water  tinged  with  the soakings  of  sesamum  seeds,  or  the  internal  sap  or water  of  a  cocoanut,  or  the  juice  of  the  Ervaruka  or  the transparent  surface  layer  of  rice  gruel,  or  the  washings of  the  Aruka  fruit,  or  the  water  tinged  with  the  fruits of  the   Priy^ngu,  or  like   the  liver  or  the   Mudga  pulse.
Chap.  XXII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  217
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — An  ulcer,  situated  in  the  cavity  of  the  ab- domen and  secreting  an  exudation  resembling  paddy husks  in  colour,  as  well  as  one  located  in  the  viscera of  blood  (spleen  or  liver — Raktasha^'am)  and  exuding a  secretion  like  alkaline  water,  should  be  deemed incurable.  Similarh',  an  ulcer  having  its  seat  in  the cavity  of  the  stomach  (Amashaya),  or  in  the  region of  the  Trika,  (articulation  of  the  clavicle  with  the intraclavicular  notch)  and  exuding  a  thin,  watery secretion,  coloured  like  the  washings  of  Kalaya  pulse, should  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  the  same  type (incurable).  A  physician  should  only  take  in  hand  the treatment  of  an  ulcer-patient  after  having  examined the  abovesaid  nature  of  the  discharges.
Pain  and  its  character  :-  Now  we  shall describe  all  the  different  kinds  of  pain,  which  are experienced  in  the  several  types  of  Vrana  (ulcers) described  before.
Vartaja  pain  : — Pains  of  pricking,  piercing, thrashing,  cutting,  expanding,  gnawing,  churning,  shoot- ing, tingling,  burning,  breaking,  bursting,  pinching, uprooting,  uplifting,  quivering,  aching  of  different types,  shifting,  stuffing,  benumbing,  indurating,  contract- ing, and  pains  of  a  spasmodic  character  are  usually felt  in  ulcers.     A   pain,  which   comes   on    or   vanishes
without   any  apparent  cause,  or   is  varied   and   shifting 28
2i8  'I'HE  SUSHKUTA  SAMHITA.      f  Chap.  XXII.
in    its   character,  should    be     ascribed    to   the   effects of  the   deranged  Vayu.
Pittaja  pain  : — A  sensation  of  burning  is  felt  in the  ulcer  accompanied  by  a  sort  of  sucking  pain.  A feeling  of  inhaling  heat  or  vapour,  and  a  burning  sensa- tion running  through  the  whole  body,  should  be  looked upon  as  the  resultant  of  the  deranged  Pittam.  At the  same  time  the  body  seems  as  if  it  had  been strewn  over  with  bits  of  glowing  charcoal.  The heat  or  (the  temperature  of  the  affected  locality) shows  a  steady  rise,  and  a  pain  like  the  one incidental  to  the  application  of  alkaline  water  (caustic solution   is  experienced  in  the  ulcer.
Raktaja  pain  : — The  pain  and  other  specific features  of  an  ulcer  due  to  the  vitiated  condition of  the  blood  are  identical  with  those  developed  by one  of  the  Pittaja  type.
Kaphaja  pain  : — An  ulcer,  characterised  by numbness,  heaviness,  coldness,  itching  and  a  slight  pain in  the  affected  part,  and  which  seems  as  if  it  has  been plastered  over  with  a  paste,  and  which  proves  insensible to  touch,  should  be  ascribed  to  the  action  of  the deranged  Kapham.
Sannipai:ika  pain  -.—The  symptoms,  de- scribed under  the  head  of  each  of  the  preceding humoural     types     of    ulcer,     simultaneously     exhibit
Chap.  XXII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  219
themselves  in  the  one  brought  about  by  the   concerted action  of  all   the  deranged  ^  humours    1  Sannipatikam).
Colours  of  Vranas  : — Now  we  shall  de- cribe  the  colours  assumed  by  the  several  types of  ulcers.  An  ulcer,  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged \'ayu,  is  rough  and  black,  red,  or  ash- coloured,  or is  of  the  colour  of  a  bone,  or  a  pigeon.  An  ulcer,  caused by  the  action  of  the  deranged  blood  or  Pittam, is  coloured  either  blue,  yellow,  greenish-brown,  black, reddish-tawny  or  flame-coloured.  An  ulcer  due  to the  action  of  the  deranged  Kapham  is  white,  grey and  gloss)'.  An  ulcer,  due  to  the  combined  action of  the  three  deranged  bodily  humours,  may  assume  any colour  peculiar  to  them.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — Not  only  in  the  cases  of  Vrana,  but  in  all (inflammatory)  swellings  of  whatsoever  type,  the physician  should  carefully  observe  the  nature  of  the local  pain,  and  the  colour  of  the  epidermis.
Thus    ends    the    t\vcnl_\--second    Chaplcr    of    the    SulraslliAnam    in     llic SushruUi  Sanihila  which  Heats  of  secretion  from  different  types  of  ulcers.
CHAPTER     XXIII.
Now  we  shall  discuss  the  chapter  which  deals with  the  Prognosis  of  an  ulcer  (Kritya'kritya- Vidhi-madhya'yam).
A  boil  or  an  ulcer  appearing  in  a  patient  who  is young,  muscular  (in  frame\  strong,  or  is  possessed  of  an indomitable  courage  and  fortitude,  proves  readily  amen- able to  healing  measures  and  applications  ;  how  much more  so  when  one  appears  in  a  patient  in  whom  all these  four  conditions  simultaneously  obtain.
An  ulcer  in  a  young  patient  is  speedily  healed owing  to  the  fresh  and  vigorous  vitalizing  principles of  the  body  ;  whereas  the  one,  which  appears  in  a  person of  strong  and  muscular  build,  finds  a  speedy  and  success- ful termination  owing  to  the  inability  of  the  incising instrument  to  cut  deep  into  the  hard  and  tough  muscles of  the  affected  part  and  to  reach  down,  or  in  any  way destro}"  the  underl3nng  veins  and  nerves,  etc.  A  strong and  vigorous  patient  can  easily  endure  a  considerable amount  of  burning  pain,  etc.  and  does  not  feel  distressed b)'  a  strict  regimen  of  diet.  A  man  of  stupendous endurance  and  fortitude  can  sustain  the  fatigue  and worry  of  even  the  most  painful  surgical  operation. Accordingly,  a  boil  or  an  ulcer,  appearing  in  a  patient  of the  above  said  description,  is  easily  and  speedil)'  healed  ;
Chap.  XXIII.  1  SUTRASTHANAM.  221
whereas  the  one,  which  affects  either  an  old,  emaciated, or  timid  person  or  one  of  small  strength  and  endurance, takes  time  to  heal.
Boils  or  ulcers,  which  appear  in  the  regions  of  the buttocks  (Sphik),  or  about  the  anus,  and  the  organs  of of  generation,  or  on  the  back,  forehead,  cheek,  or lips,  or  in  the  region  of  the  external  ears,  or  on the  testes  or  the  abdomen,  or  in  the  cavity  of  the mouth,  or  about  the  nape  of  the  neck,  or  above the  clavicles,  can  be  easily  healed.  Those,  that  are seated  in  the  eyes,  or  in  the  gums,  the  nostrils  or  the exterior  angle  of  the  e3^e,  or  in  the  cavity  of  the  ears, abdomen  or  the  umbilicus,  or  about  any  suture  of  the body,  hips,  ribs,  arm-pits,  chest,  breasts,  sides,  or  the joints,  as  well  as  those,  that  secrete  frothy  blood  or  pus with  a  gurgling  sound,  or  contain  any  foreign  matter  em- bedded in  their  inside,  are  healed  only  with  the  greatest difihcult3\
Similarl}^  an  abscess  or  an  ulcer  appearing  in  the nether  region  of  the  body  and  pointing  upward,  or the  one  appearing  on  the  extremity  of  scalp  (Romanta) or  about  the  end  of  a  finger-nail,  or  in  an)"  of  the vulnerable  parts  of  the  body,  as  well  as  the  one affecting  either  of  the  thigh  bones  (femurs),  should  be looked  upon  as  equally  hard  to  cure.  Likewise  an abscess  or  an  ulcer  affecting  a  bone  of  the  pelvis 'Shronikanda- Acetabulum),      as    well      as     a      fistula
222  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap,  xxill.
in   ano   opening   inward   should   be   regarded   as   hard to  cure.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — An  ulcer  (Vrana)  appearing  in  a  leper  (Kushthi or  in  a  person  suffering  from  diabetes  iMadhu- meha  ,  or  from  Shosha  (lit  :  pulmonary- consumption) or  from  the  effects  of  poison,  as  well  as  the  one appearing  in  a  pre-existing  ulcer,  should  be  looked  upon as  curable  only  with  the  greatest  difficulty.
Ya'pya  ulcers  :--An  ulcer  incidental  to,  and affecting  the  seat  of  any  of  the  following  diseases, viz.  Avap^thika  (  paraphimosis  ,  or  Niruddha-Prakash (phimosis),  or  Sanniruddha-guda  (constriction  of the  anus),  or  Jathara  abdominal-dropsy),  or  Granthi (glandular  inflammation),  and  characterised  by  the germination  of  parasites  in  its  interior,  as  well  as the  one  appearing  in  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen _,  or affecting  the  mucous  linings  of  the  intestines,  or  brought about  by  the  corrosi>'e  secretions  of  a  nasal  catarrh (Pratishyaya),  and  infested  with  parasites,  should  be considered  as  onh-  admitting  of  a  palliative  treatment. Similarly  palliation  is  the  only  remedy  in  the  case  of an  ulcer  which  appears  in  a  patient  suffering  from  any morbid  secretion  from  the  urethra  (Prameha)  or  from any  form  of  cutaneous  affections,  marked  by  worms  in its  inside.
Likewise    a   case   of  gravel    Sharkara  ,    or    urinary
Chap.  XXIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  223
calculi  ■  Shikata )  in  which  the  urine  is  found  to  be charged  with  concretions,  or  leaves  a  deposit  of  sandy sediment,  can  not  be  radicalh'  cured  by  medicine  alone. A  case  of  V^ta-kundalika,  Asthila,  Upakusha,  Kantha- saluka,  Danta-sharkar^,  Danta-veshta,  ^'isarpa,  Asthi- kshata,  Uru-kshata,  or  Vrana-Granthi,  may  not  perfectly yield  to  medicine  alone.  In  an  inflammation  of  the  gums resulting  from  the  use  of  poisonous  twigs  as  brushes for  teeth  Xishkoshana)  a  temporary  amelioration  is  all that  can  be  expected  from  a  good  and  efficient treatment.
IVIetrical  texts  :— In  a  patient  neglecting  a disease  at  its  preliminary  stage,  (or  otherwise  not observing  a  strict  regimen)  even  a  curable  malady  ma}' speedily  develop  into  one  which  admits  only  of  pallia- tive measures,  while  a  disease  of  the  last  named  type  is soon  transformed  into  an  incurable  one.  An  in- curable disease  under  the  circumstances  speedily  finds a  fatal  termination.  A  patient  laid  up  with  a  disease, which  only  admits  of  a  palliative  treatment,  lives  so  long as  the  course  of  the  medical  treatment  is  continued,  and will  die  almost  simultaneously  with  its  discontinuance. Just  as  a  prop  or  a  pillar  can  prevent  the  collapse  of a  tumbling  edifice,  so  palliative  measures,  judiciously^ applied  by  a  skilful  physician,  may  keep  off  the inevitable  in  a  disease  which  knows  no  radical  cure.
Incurable   diseases  :— Now  we   shall  de-
224  '^^^  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [Chap,  xxili.
scribe  the  types  of  diseases  which  are  usually  held  as  in- curable. An  ulcer  (\'rana)  cropping  up  like  a  fleshy tumour,  painful  and  containing  pus  in  its  inside,  and which  is  characterised  by  a  copious  secretion,  with  its edges  raised  like  those  of  the  genital  of  a  mare,  should be  understood  as  belonging  to  the  incurable  type.  A condylomatous  (papillomatous  )  ulcer  which  is  soft  and raised  like  the  horn  of  a  cow,  or  the  one  which  is moderately  raised  or  elevated  at  its  base,  and  secretes an  exudation  of  vitiated  blood,  or  a  thin  slimy  secretion, should  be  likewise  regarded  as  incurable.  An  ulcer with  an  embossed  or  heaved  up  centre,  and  one  dipped  or fissured  at  its  extremity  should  be  regarded  as  past  all remedy.  An  ulcer  covered  over  with  shreds  of  ligaments, and  looking  as  if  studded  with  loose  shreds  of  hemp, should  be  given  up  as  incurable.  Similarly,  an ulcer  due  to  the  deranged  condition  of  any  of  the  funda- mental humours,  and  secreting  an  exudation  composed of  coagulated  blood,  fat,  marrow  and  brain-matter should  be  deemed  incurable.
Likewise,  an  ulcer,  in  a  weak  and  emaciated  person, which  is  located  within  the  cavity  of  the  abdomen, (Koshtha:  and  which  assumes  either  a  black  or  yellow- ish colour,  and  exudes  a  secretion  composed  of  urine, pus,  blood  and  fecal  matter,  which  finds  its  outlet  both through  the  upward  and  downward  fissures  of  the  body (the  mouth  and  the  anus)  making  a  rumbling,   gurgling
i
Chap.  XXIII.  ]  SUTKASTHANAM.  225
sound,  or  which  simultaneously  secretes  pus  and  blood through  both  the  channels,  should  be  regarded  as  belong- ing to  the  incurable  class.  An  ulcer  in  an  emaciated patient,  which  is  situated  either  on  the  head  or  in  the throat,  and  which  is  narrow-mouthed  and  is  tra\ersed by  a  network  of  capillaries,  and  studded  with fleshy  or  papillomatous  eruptions,  should  be  regarded as  incurable.  A  distinctly  audible  sound  or  report  is heard  in  these  ulcers  which  are  found  to  be  charged with  wind.
An  ulcer  in  an  emaciated  patient,  which  secretes blood  and  pus,  and  is  attended  with  indigestion,  cough, painful  respiration  and  non-relish  for  food,  as  well  as  a case  of  fractured  skull,  attended  with  cough,  dyspnoea, secretion  of  brain-matter,  and  symptoms  peculiar  to  the concerted  action  of  the  three  deranged  humours  of  the body,  should  be  given    up  as  past  all  remedy.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — A  traumatic  ulcer,  which  exudes  a  secretion of  fat,  marrow  or  brain- matter,  may  prove  amenable to  medical  treatment,  whereas  a  humoural  ulcer  under the  circumstance  will  prove  incurable.  •
An   ulcer   appearing    at   an}'  part  of  the  body  other
than  a  vital  one  (Marma),  and  which  is  found  to  invade
its   successive    elements  though  without   affecting  any
vein,  bone,  joint,  etc.  should  be   regarded   as  incurable.
29
226  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap,  xxili.
Just  as  a  tree,  that  has  grown  old  and  that  has  spread  its roots  deep  into  the  soil,  can  not  be  uprooted,  so  a  disease can  not  be  eradicated  that  has  gained  in  strength  and maturity  with  the  process  of  time,  and  that  has  gradually invaded  the  different  essential  principles  of  the  body. A  disease,  which,  having  been  neglected  at  the  outset, has  run  on  to  one  of  a  lingering  or  persistent  type by  invading  the  successive  elements  of  the  bod}', and  has  thereby  gained  in  strength  and  intensity, baffles  medicines,  (of  tested  and  marked  eflicac)^, just  as  malignant  astral  combinations  tend  to  nullify potent  incantations.
Symptoms     of     cleansed       Fiealthy
ulcers  : — An  ulcer,  not  belonging  to  any  of  the above  said  types,  may  prove  easily  amenable  to  the curative  efficacies  of  medicines.  In  other  words,  an  ulcer of  recent  origin  is  easily  uprooted  like  a  tender  sapling of  recent  gi^owth.  An  ulcer,  which  is  unaffected  by  any of  the  three  deranged  bodily  humours,  and  which  assumes a  dark  brown  hue  along  its  edges,  and  is  characterised by  the  absence  of  any  pain,  pustular  eruptions  or secretions,  and  which  is  of  an  even  or  of  an  equal elevation  throughout  its  length,  should  be  regarded  as cleansed  (asepsised  or  healthy),  and  divested  of  all morbid  matter  or  principle  (Shuddha-Vrana).
Symptoms    of    Healing    Ulcers:— An
ulcer,   which   is  dove-coloured  (yellowish  dusky),  and  is
Chap.  XXIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  227
not  lardaceous  at  its  base,  and  is  further  characterised  by the  absence  of  any  muco-piirulent  secretion  along  its margin,  and  which  has  become  hard  and  surrounded b}'  shreds  of  dead  skin,  and  presents  symptoms  of healthy  granulation,  should  be  looked  upon  as  in course  of  healing.
Symptoms  of  Healed  Ulcers:— An  ulcer, with  its  edges  firmly  adhered  and  characterised  by  the absence  of  any  pain  and  swelling  and  not  appearing knotty  or  glandular  to  the  touch  and  that  has  left  a cicatrix  of  the  same  hue  with  the  surrounding  skin, should  be  considered  as  perfectly  healed.
Causes,  such  as  mental  excitements,  as  excessive  grief and  ecstacies  of  joy,  anger  or  fright,  as  well  as  an  exter- nal blow,  or  excessive  physical  exercise,  or  an  abnormal excitation  of  any  of  the  deranged  humours,  or  an impaired  digestion,  may  tend  to  reopen  an  ulcer recently  adhered  and  healed.  Accordingly  such  acts and  conditions  should  be  avoided  by  an  ulcer-patient.
Thus   ends    the   twenty-third    Chapter    of    the    Sutrasth^nam     in    the Sushruta  Samhita,  which  treats  of  the  prognosis  of  ulcers.
C  H  A  P  i  E  R     XXIV.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter^  which  deals with  the  classification  of  diseases  according  to  their specific  nature  (Vya'dhi-Samudcihcshiya- madhya'yam).
Diseases  may  be  grouped  under  two  broad  sub- divisions, such  as  Surgical,  and  Medical,  that  is  those that  yield  to  the  administration  of  purgatives,  emetics, oils,  diaphoretics,  and  unguents.
The  use  or  administration  of  medicated  oils  and unguents,  etc.,  is  not  prohibited  in  a  surgical  disease, while  a  case,  which  is  exclusively  medicinal  in  its character,  does  not  admit  of  the  adoption  of  any  surgical remedy.  Onl}^  a  general  outline  of  the  nature and  S3miptoms  of  all  diseases  will  be  found  to  have been  briefly  laid  down  in  the  present  work.  This  work includes  within  its  scope  subject  matters  which  have been  fully  dealt  with  in  other  books  (having  only  a general  bearing  upon  all  the  several  branches  of  the science  of  medicine).
It  has  been  stated  before  that  anj^thing  that  afflicts either  the  body  or  the  living  personality— self,  or both,    is     called     disease.       This     pain     or     affliction
Chap.  XXIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  229
ma}^  be  either  physical*  in  its  character  (Adhyat- mikam),  or  due  to  an}'-  disturbance  in  the  physical environments  of  a  man  (Adhibhautikam),  or  to  the acts  of  God  (Adhidaivikam)  etc.  This  three- fold pain  may  be  ultimately  transformed  into  an)'  of the  seven  kinds  of  diseases  such  as,  the  Adi-vala-pravritta, Janma-vala-pravritta,  Dosha- vala-pravritta,  Sanghata- vala-pravritta,  Kala- vala-pravritta,  Daiva-vala-pravritta and  Svabhava- vala-pravritta.
A'di -vala-pravritta  :— The  disease  termed Adi-vala-pravritta  is  ascribed  to  any  inherent  defect in  the  semen  or  the  ovum  of  one's  parent,  which  forms one  of  the  original  and  primary  factors  of  "  being  "  and includes  leprosy  (Kushtham),  hemorrhoids,  phthisis  etc. This  type  may  be  divided  into  two  subdivisions, according  as  the  disease  is  generated  by  the  deranged paternal  or  maternal  factor  at  the  time  of  incubation.
J  an  ma -vala-pravritta  :— The  Congenital or  the  Janma-vala-pravritta  type  usually  follows such  causes  as  an  improper  conduct  on  the  part of  the  mother  during  the  period  of  gestation,  etc.,  and embraces  such  defects  or  maladies  as  (congenital) blindness,  deafness,  dumbness,  nasal-voice,  and  such monstrous  aberrations  of  nature  as  congenital  cretinism,
*  Certain  commentators  interpret  the  term  "Atman"  in  "AdhyStmikam" to  mean  body  only,  and  accordingly  designate  all  phenomena  that  may  be manifest  in  the  body  as  AdhyAtmikam,
230  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XXIV.
and  the  births  of  dwarfs  and  pigmies.  This  type, in  its  turn,  admits  of  two  sub-divisions,  according  as the  disease  is  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  lymph- chyle  (Rasa-krita),  or  to  an  ungratified  desire  of  the mother  during  gestation,  or  to  her  gratification  •  of any  improper  longing  or  conduct  during  pregnancy (Dauhridyam).
Dosha-vala-pravritta  -.—The  Dosha-vala- pravritta  (idiopathic)  type  is  due  to  the  action  of any  of  the  fundamental  bodily  humours  deranged  by  an improper  diet,  or  resulting  from  the  dynamical  energies of  the  mind,  such  as  (Rajas  and  Tamas,  etc).  This type  may  be  classified  under  two  sub-heads,  according as  the  disease  is  found  to  have  its  origin  in  the  Amashaya (stomach),  or  in  the  Pakvashaya  (intestines),  and  each  of these  again  may  be  further  divided  into  two  main sub-divisions  such  as  the  physical  and  the  mental.  The three  preceding  kinds  of  diseases  include  within  their category  disorders  which  are  called  mental  or  psychical (Adhyatmikam).
Samghala-vala-Pravritta  :— The  Trau- matic type  (Samghatha-vala-pravritta)  includes  diseases that  are  caused  by  an  external  blow  or  are  due to  wrestling  with  an  antagonist  of  superior  strength. They  may  be  sub-divided  into  minor  divisions, according  as  the  disease  is  due  to  an  external wound,   or     to    the     bite  from    any  fierce   beast    or
Chap.  XXIV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
231
poisonous  reptile,  etc.  These  types  belong  to  the  Adhi- bhautikam  t5'pe,  i.  e.  (brought  about  by  physical causes).
Ka'Ia-vala-pravritta:— The  Periodical  type (K^la-vala-pravritta)  includes  diseases  that  are  brought about  by  the  variation  of  atmospheric  heat  or  humidity with  the  change  of  the  seasons,  and  admits  of  being grouped  under  two  different  sub-heads,  according  as  the seasons,  which  usher  these  changes  in,  exhibit  natural or  contrary  features.
Daiva-vala-pravritta  :— The  Providential ('Daiva-vala-pravritta^  type  includes  diseases  that  are  the embodiments  of  curses,  divine  wrath  or  displeasure,  or are  brought  about  through  the  mystic  potencies  of  charms and  spells,  as  described  in  the  Atharva-Veda.  This type  may  be  divided  into  two  minor  divisions  according as  the  disease  is  due  to  such  acts  of  God  as  when  a man  is  struck  by  lightning,  etc.,  or  to  the  malignant influences  of  demons  and  monsters,  and  these  may  be further  grouped  under  two  main  sub-heads,  according  as the  disease  assumes  a  contagious  character  (epidemic),  or is  purely  accidental,  and  restricts  itself  to  isolated cases  (sporadic).
Svabha'va-vala-pravritta:— The  Natural
or  the  Spontaneous  (Svabhava-vala-pravritta)  type includes       such       natural      organic     phenomena      as,
232
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XXIV.
decrepitude,  death,  *  hunger,  thirst,  sleep,  etc. These  phenomena  are  either  Kalakrita  (timely)  or Akalakrita  (untimely).  They  are  called  Kalakrita  when the}^  occur  at  the  proper  time  in  persons  who  strictly observe  the  rules  of  health,  and  Akalakrita,  when  they appear  at  the  improper  time  (morbid  or  premature) as  the  effects  of  unhealthy  living.  These  diseases  belong to  the  Providential  or  Adhi-daivikam  typet.  Thus  we have  classified  diseases  into  their  several  types.
The  deranged  bodily  humours  such  as,  Vayu,  Pittam and  Kapham  should  be  looked  upon  as  the  primary sources  of  all  diseases,  inasmuch  as  symptoms  charac- teristic of  each  of  them  may  be  detected  in  the  case  of a  disease  of  whatsoever  type,  (which  usually  abates with  their  corresponding  subsidence),  and  also  because the  Shastras  have  ascribed  to  them  the  fatherhood of  all  maladies  that  assail  the  human  frame.
As  the  three  qualities  of  Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamasi
are  inherent  in,  and  inseparable  from,  all  the  pheno- menal appearances  in  the  universe  whicli  are,  in  reality,
*  Accord. ng  lo  certain  aulhorilies  "Death"  may  also  mean  death of  tissues.
+  Several  authorities  on  the  other  hand  include  such  diseases  as  thirst, hunger  etc.,  within  the  Adhy^tmika  class  inasmuch  as  they  are  but  the indications  of  the  want  of  certain  vital  principles  in  the  body  and appear  in  the  mental  plane  (Adhy^tmika)  only  as  longings  for water,  food,  ttc
X  The  Sattva  :— Illuminating  or  psychic  principle.  Rajas  : — Prin- ciple of  Action  and  Co-hesion.  Tanias  -.—Principle  of  Nescience  or  Illusion.
Chap.  XXIV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  233
but  modifications  of  their  own  qualities,  so  the  three fundamental  bodily  hum'ours  underlie  at  the  root of,  and  run  through,  the  course  of  all  known  forms  of bodily  distemper.
The  deranged  bodily   humours   (Dosha"   in   contact with  the  different   elements,    Dhathu)   and   excrements (Mala)   of  the   body,  together   with   the   difference   of their     locations  and    pathological    effects,   give   rise   to the  different  forms  of  disease.*
The  nomenclature  of  a  disease  depends  upon  where the  affection  of  the  several  elementary  principles  of  the body  by  the  deranged  bodily  humours  lies,  and  which  is accordingly  styled  as  it  is  seated  in  the  lymph- chyle,  or  in the  blood  or  the  flesh,  or  it  is  in  fat,  bone,  or  in  the  semen.
Rasaja  Distempers  :— Distempers  such  as aversion  to,  and  loss  of  relish  for '  food_,  indigestion, aching  in  the  limbs,  fever,  nausea  and  a  sense  of  reple- tion even  without  food,  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  diseases affecting  the  heart,  jaundice,  constriction  of  any  in- ternal passage  of  the  body  (Margo-parodha),  emaciation of  the  body  ^cachexia),  bad  taste  in  the  mouth,  weak feelings  in  the  limbs,  premature  whiteness  and  falling  off of  the  hair,  and  s)^mptoms  indicative  of  senile  decay, should  be  regarded  as  having  their  seat  in  the  deranged l5"mph- chyle  (Rasa).
*  This  answers  the  question,  "how  can  the  deranged  bodily  hmnours bring  about  a  disease  of  the  Adhi-vala-type — a  disease  which  is  specifically due  to  the    derangement  of  the  innate  and  primary  factors  of  life."
30
234  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [Chap.  XXIV.
Raktaja  Diseases  :  — Maladies  such  as  Kush- tha  (cutaneous  affections  in  general ,  Visarpa  (erysipe- las), Pidaka  (pustular  eruptions,  Mashaka,  Nilika, Tilakalaka  (specks),  Nachhya  (tans),  Vyanga  (stains), Indralupta  alopecia),  enlarged- spleen,  Vidradhi  (ab- scess*, Gulma  abdominal  glands),  Vata-shonita  (a  kind of  leprosy),  Arsha  (piles),  Arvuda  (tumours),  aching  of the  hmbs^  menorrhagia,  h£emopt3'sis,  etc.  as  well  as suppuration  in  the  regions  of  the  anus  and  the  penis should  be  deemed  as  having  their  origin  in  the blood  Raktaja  contaminated  by  the  deranged  bodily humours.
IVSa'nsaj a- Diseases  :— Similarly  Adhi-mansa, Arvuda,  Arsha,  Adhi-jihva,  Upa-jihva,  Upakusha, Gala-sunthika,  Alaji,  Mansha-sanghata  (condylomatous growth),  Astha-prakopa,  Gala-ganda,  Garjda-mala (scrofula),  etc.  should  be  regarded  as  diseases  having their  seat  in  the  flesh,  vitiated  by  the  deranged  bodily humours.
IVledaja- Distempers  :— Diseases,  such  as Granthi,  \'riddhi,  Gala-ganda,  Arvuda,  and  Ostha-prakopa are  due  to  tlie  action  of  the  deranged  fat.  Madhu-meha (diabetes),  obesitv  and  abnormal  diaphoresis,  etc.  should be  regarded  as  having  their  origin  in  the  humour- deranged  fat  of  the  body.
Asthija- Disease  :— Adhyasthi,  Adhi-danta, Asthi-toda,    Asthi-shula    and    Ku-nakha,    etc.    are   the
Chap.  XXIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  235
diseases  which  should  be  regarded  as  the  outcome  of the  deranged  bodily  humours  affecting  the  bones.
IVIaJJadoshaJa  Diseases  :— The  vanishing
of  sight,  epileps}';  vertigo,  conjunctivitis  and  the  appear- ance of  a  broad-based  ulcer  about  the  Parva- sthanam  and  a  sense  of  heaviness  in  the  thighs  and knee-joints  should  be  regarded  as  having  their  seat  in the  deranged  marrow.
Shukra-doshaja  :— Diseases  such  as,  im- potency,  entire  aversion  to  sexual  intercourse,  Shukra- shmari  fseminal  concretions).  Spermatorrhoea,  and  other seminal  affections,  should  be  regarded  as  having  their seat  in  the  deranged  semen.
Cutaneous  affections,  constipation  or  looseness  of  the bowels,  and  diseases  impeding  or  arresting  the  proper functions  of  the  sense-organs  or  in  an}"  wa}"  bringing about  their  aberrations,  should  be  regarded  as  respec- tively located  in  the  receptacle  of  the  faeces  and  the sense  organs.
Thus  we  have  briefl}'  enumerated  the  names  of diseases,  the  specific  nature  and  symptoms  of  which will  be  full)'  discussed  later  on  under  their  respective heads.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  Sub- ject :— The  deranged  and  aggravated  humours,  freely coursing  through  the  body,  give  rise  to  a  disease    at  the
:J36
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  xxiv.
place   in   which     they   are   incarcerated   owing   to  an obstruction  in  their  natural  passage.
Now  it  may  be  again  asked,  whether  the  relation of  a  disease,  such  as  fever,  etc.  with  the  deranged  bodily humours  is  constant  and  inseparable,  or  otherwise.  All human  beings  would  be  in  danger  of  perpetually falhng ill  in  the  event  of  the  said  connection  relation; being  constant  and  unseparable  ;  but  in  case  of  their separate  existence,  it  is  but  natural  that  their  charac- terstic  symptoms  should  separately  manifest  them- selves instead  of  being  simultaneously  present  with fever,  etc.  as  they  are  found  to  be  in  reality.  And accordingly  the  theor)',  that  diseases  (such  as,  fever,  etc.) and  the  deranged  bodily  humours  have  a  separate existence,  and  are  not  pritna  facie  intimately  co-related with  one  another  falls  to  the  ground.  On  the other  hand,  the  assumption  of  their  separate  existence invalidates  the  incontestable  conclusion,  that  diseases such  as,  fever,  etc.  are  fathered  by  the  deranged  humours of  the  body.
Hence  it  may  be  safely  asserted  that  no  disease  can occur  without  the  direct  mediation  or  intervention  of the  deranged  bodily  humours.  Yet  the  connection (relation)  which  exists  between  the  two  is  neither constant  nor  separable.  As  the  physical  phenomena  of lightning,  storm,  thunder  and  rain  can  not  happen independently     of    the     sky   (cloud) ;    and     yet   they
Chap.  XXIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  237
sometimes  do  or  do  not  occur  with  the  presence  of  a cloud ;  again  as  bubbles^  though  in  reality  but  the modifications  of  the  underlying  water,  do  not  swell up  on  its  surface  at  all  times,  so  the  connection between  a  disease  and  the  bodily  humours  is  neither universally  separable  or  inseparable.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject :  —We  shall  describe  the  nature,  intensity  and quality  of  diseases  with  their  complications  and  give the  number  of  their  different  t3'pes.  Diseases [omitted  to  be  mentioned  in  the  chapter  on  Xidanam (aetiology)]  will  be  found  fully  dealt  with  in  the  sup- plementary part  of  the  present  work  (Uttara-tantram).
Thus  ends  the  Iwenty-fourlh  Chapter  of  the  SulrasthSnam  in  the Sushruta  SamhitA  which  treats  of  the  classification  of  diseases  according to  their  specific  nature.
CHAPTER    XXV.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  deals with   the   eight   different  forms    of  surgical    operations
(Ashtavidha-Shastra-  Karmanya  -  ma- dhya'yam).
Metrical  Texts  :— Bhagandara,  Shlaishmika Granthi,  Tilakalaka,  Arvuda,  Arsha,  Charma-Kila, Jatumani,  Mansa-Samgh^ta,  Gala-Sunthik^,  Valmika, Vrana-Vartma,  Shataponaka,  Adhrusha,  Upadansha, Mansakandha,  Adhimansaka,  as  well  as  ailments  due  to the  lodgment  of  a  foreign  body  in  the  flesh  or  a  bone, and  a  sloughing  of  ligaments,  flesh  or  veins  are  the diseases  in  which  incision  i  Chhed)^am  should  be  made.
Bhedyam  : -Excision  (Bhedyam)  should  be resorted  to  in  the  following  diseases,  viz.,  Vidradhis,  the three  types  of  Granthi  other  than  the  Sannipatika  one, Visarpa  due  either  to  the  deranged  Vayu,  Pittam  or Kapham,  Vriddhi,  Vidarika,  Prameha-pidaka,  swellings in  general,  diseases  affecting  the  mammary  organs, Avamanthaka,  Kumbhika,  Anushayi^  Nadi,  the  two types  of  Vrinda,  Pushkarika,  Alaji,  Kshudra-roga  (all minor  cutaneous  or  pustular  diseases),  the  three types  of  Puppata,  Talu-puppata,  and  Danta-puppata ; Tundukeri,  Gil^Cyu,  and  the  diseases  which  are  caused by  suppuration  in  the  local  flesh  or  any  soft  part  of  the
[Chap.  XXV.  SUTRASTHANAM.  239
body  ^siich  as  fistula  in  ano),    as   well   as   stone  ni   the bladder  and  diseases  due  to  a  derangement  of  fat.*
Lekhyam  : — The  surgical  operation  known  as scarification  Lekhya;  should  be  resorted  to  in  the  follow^- ing  diseases,  viz,  the  four  types  of  Rohini,  Kilasa,  Upaji- hva,  diseases  having  their  seat  in  the  deranged  fat, Danta-Vaidarbha,  Granthi,  Vrana-Vartma,  Adhi-Jihva, Arshah,  Mandala,  Mansa-kandi,  and  Mansonnati.
Vyadhanam  : — The  Surgical  operation  known as  Vyadhanam  (aspiration;  should  be  made  use  of in  connection  with  a  vein,  or  a  case  of  Dakodaram (abdominal  dropsy),  or  Mutra-Vriddhi  (hydrocele). Diseases,  in  connection  witli  which  the  probe  or  the director  should  be  used,  are  Nadis  ( sinus)  and  ulcers wMth  an}^  extraneous  or  foreign  body  lodged  in  their inside,  and  those  which  follow  abnormal  (lateral  or oblique'  directions.
A'harryam  :— The  process  known  as  Aharanam (extraction  or  drawing  out)  should  be  adopted  in  the three  types  of  Sharkar^,t  in  drawing  out  anj^  morbid matter  from  between  the  teeth  or  from  the  cavity of  the  ears,  or  in  extracting  any  foreign  matter  from  its seat  of  lodgment   in   the   body,  or  a   stone   from   the
*  Granthi  (gland),  Galaganda  (goitre),  \'riddhi  (scrotal  tumour)  Apachi (scrofula)  and  Arvuda  (tumour)  are  the  fat-origined  diseases  contemplated as  instances.
t  Such  as  urinary  calculi,  calcareous  deposits  on  the  teeth,  and  P5da- SharkarS.
240  THE  SUSHRUTA    SAMHITA'.       [  Chap.  XXV.
bladder,  or  in  drawing  out  feces  from  the  constricted anus,  or  a  foetus  from  the  uterus,  (as  in  the  case  of  a false  presentation  or  difficult  labour).
Srarvyam  :— Secreting  or  evacuating  measures (Srav5'^am)  should  be  adopted  in  the  following diseases,  viz,  the  five  types  of  Vidradhi  excepting  the Sannipatika  one,  Kustha  of  whatsoever  type,  derange- ment of  the  bodily  V^yu  with  pain  in  the  affected region,  inflammatory  swellings  restricted  to  any  particu- lar part  of  the  body,  diseases  affecting  the  ear-lobes, Shleepada  (elephantiasis^  blood  poisoning,  Arvuda (tumours),  Visarpa  Terysipelas),  Granthi  (glands  due to  any  of  the  deranged  Vayu,  Pittam,  or  Kapham)  the three  types  of  Upadansha  (syphilis),  Stana-roga  (in- flammation! of  the  mammae),  Vidarika,  Shaushira,  Gala- Shaluka,  Kantaka,  Krimi-dantaka  worm-eaten  teeth), Danta-veshta  (inflammation  of  the  gums),  Upakusha, Shit^da,  Danta-puppata,  diseases  of  the  lips  originated through  the  action  of  the  deranged  blood,  Pittam  or Kapham,  and  a  variety  of  other  diseases  passing  under the  denomination  of  Kshudra-Roga  (minor  ailments\
Sccvyam  : — Suturing  rSeevya*  should  be resorted  to  in  the  case  of  an  open  ulcer  due  to the  action  of  the  deranged  fat  after  its  vitiated contents  (morbid  matter)  had  been  fully  scraped  out,  as well  as  in  the  case  of  an  uncomplicated  (curable"^  Sadya- Vrana   (wound   or   instant  ulcer)  at   any   of  the   joints
Chap.  x.w.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  24  r
which  are  connected  with  the  acts  of  movement  or  loco- motion.
Conditions  of  Suturing:— An  ulcer  in- cidental to  the  application  of  fire  (canter}'),  or  any  al- kaline preparation  (caustic),  or  treated  with  any  poison- ous drug  or  substance,  or  from  whose  inside  the  em- bedded Shalyam  (foreign  matter)  has  not  been  removed, should  not  be  sewed  up  without  being  thoroughly cleansed  and  purified  asepsised  =  inasmuch  as  any  foreign matter,  whether  a  hair,  nail  or  a  particle  of  dust  or  bone, lying  embedded  in  its  cavity,  might  set  up  an  abnormal suppuration,  accompanied  by  extreme  pain  and  excessive secretion.  Hence  such  ulcers  should  be  thoroughly cleansed  (and  all  foreign  or  indigenous  morbid  matter should  be  extracted  therefrom)  before  being  sewed  up.
Mode  of  Suturing  :— Then  having  pressed the  ulcer  up  into  its  proper  position,  it  should  be sutured  with  strings  of  any  of  the  following  kinds,  viz. of  thin  cotton  thread,  of  the  fibres  of  the  Ashman- taka  tree  or  hemp  plants,  or  of  the  Atasi,  Murva  or Guduchi,  or  with  strips  of  leather,  plaited  horse- hair or  animal  sinews,  into  any  of  the  officinal shapes  (of  suturing)  known  as  the  Gophana,  Tunna- Sevani  and  Riju-Granthi,  etc.  or  as  suited  to  the shape  and  position  of  the  ulcerated  part.  The  margin of  the  ulcer  should  be  gently  pressed  close  with the    fingers     during     suturing.      A     round   needle     to
242  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.  XXV.
the  length  of  two  fingers'  width  should  be  used  in  sew- ing up  an  ulcer  occurring  about  any  joint  or  in  a  part  of the  body  where  the  flesh  is  thin  and  scanty.  A  needle of  a  triangular  body  tri-hedral),  and  measuring  three fingers'  width  in  length,  is  recommended  in  the  case  of an  ulcer  appearing  at  any  flesh}'  part  of  the  body. A  semi-circular  or  bow-shaped  needle  should  be  used in  a  case  where  the  seat  of  the  ulcer  would  be  found to  be  on  the  scrotum,  or  on  the  skin  of  the  abdomen,  or about  any   of  the  Marmas  (vital  parts).
Needles  of  these  three  shapes  should  be  so  construc- ted as  to  be  fitted  with  sharp  points  capable  of  being handled  with  the  greatest  ease,  having  a  girth  equal that  of  the  stem  of  a  Malati  flower.
The  needle  should  not  be  pricked  into  a  part  too  near, or  too  remote  from  the  fissure,  or  the  mouth  of  an  ulcer, as  there  might  be  the  danger  of  the  suture  being  broken off  (at  the  least  pressure  or  movement)  in  the  first instance  and  of  genesis  of  pain  in  the  second.  xAn ulcer,  thus  properly  sutured,  should  be  covered over  with  cotton  and  dusted  over  with  a  pulverised compound  consisting  of  the  powders  of  Priyangu, Anjanam,  Yasthyahva  and  Rodhra,  or  with  the  ashes of  a  burnt  piece  of  Kshauma  cloth,  or  with  the  powders of  the  Shallaki  fruit.  Then  the  ulcer  should  be  properly bandaged,  and  measures  and  rules  regarding  the  regimen of  diet,  and  conduct  previously  laid  down  in  the  chapter
Chap.  XXV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  243
on  the  nursing  of  an  ulcer- patient  (Ch.  XIX. )  should be  adopted  and  observed.
The  eight  kinds  of  surgical  operations  have  thus  been briefly  described.  They  will  be  dealt  with  later  on  in the  Chikitsitam.
Defective  Surgical  Operations:— These
eight  forms  of  operations  may  be  attended  with  dangers of  four  different  kinds  such  as  those  arising  from  an insufficient  or  over  performance,  or  from  the  slanting or  oblique  deviation  (of  the  knife  or  the  instrument), or  from  an  act  of  self-injury  on  the  part  of  the physician.
A  physician  (  surgeon  ;  making  a  wrong  operation  on the  body  of  his  patient  either  through  mistake,  or through  the  want  of  necessary  skill  or  knowledge,  or out  of  greed,  fear,  nervousness  or  haste,  or  in  conse- quence of  being  spurned  or  abused,  should  be  condemned as  the  direct  cause  of  many  new  and  unforeseen  maladies. A  patient,  with  any  instinct  of  self-preservation,  would do  well  to  keep  aloof  from  such  a  ph\sician,  or  from  one who  makes  a  wrong  or  injudicious  application  of  the cautery,  and  should  shun  his  presence  just  as  he  would shun  a  conflagration  or  a  cup  of  fatal  poison.
On  the  other  hand,  a  surgical  operation,  carried  to excess,  (or  a  surgical  instrument  inserted  deeper  than what    is   necessary  ,    is   attended    with    the   danger   of
244  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAiMHlTA.       L  Chap.  xxv.
cutting  or  destroying  a  vein,  ligament,  bone,  joint,  or any  vital  part  of  the  body.  '  A  surgical  operation  by an  ignorant  surgeon  brings  about,  in  most  cases,  the instantaneous  death  of  the  patient,  or  consigns  him  to the  pangs  of  a  life-long  death.
The  symptoms  which  generally  manifest  themselves in  connection  with  the  injudicious  hurting  of  any  of  the five  vital  parts  or  principles  of  the  body  (such  as  the joints,  bones,  veins,  ligaments,  etc.)  are  vertigo,  delirium, loss  of  bodily  functions,  semi-insensibility  (  comatose state),  incapacity  of  supporting  oneself,  cessation  of mental  functions,  heat,  fainting,  looseness  of  the  limbs, difficult  respiration,  excruciating  pain  or  pain  peculiar  to the  deranged  Vayu,  secretion  of  blood  or  a  thin  watery secretion  like  the  washings  of  meat  from  the  injured part,  or  the  organ,  with  coma  or  inoperativeness  of  all the  senses.  A  vein*  iShira)  any  wa}'  severed  or  injured  is attended  with  a  copious  flow  (haemorrhage  of  deep  red blood,  resembling  the  hue  of  the  cochineal  insect,  from the  ulcer  ;  and  the  deranged  local  Vayu  readil}'  exhibits all  its  essential  characteristics,  and  ushers  in  diseases which  have  been  enumerated  under  that  head  in  the chapter  on  the  description  of  blood.)
Similarly,  an  injured  ligament  gives  rise  to  a  crooked- ness or  bending  of,  as  well  as  to  a    gone   feeling   in   the
*  Other  than  ihc  one    silualcd  in    any  of  the   abovesaid  vital    parts   of the  body.
Chap.  XXV.  ]  SUTRASIHA'NAM.  245
injured  limb  or  organ,  attended  with  pain  and  loss  of function,  and  the  incidental  ulcer  takes  a  long  time to  heal.
An  abnormal  increase  in  the  local  swelling,  together with  an  excruciating  pain,  loss  ol  strength,  breaking pain  in  the  joints,  and  in-operativeness  of  the  affected part,  mark  the  wounding  of  a  flexible  or  immovable joint.  Similarly,  in  the  case  where  a  bone  is  hurt  or injured  in  the  course  of  a  surgical  operation,  the  patient is  tormented  with  indescribable  pain,  da}'  and night,  and  finds  no  comfort  in  any  position  what- soever. Pain  and  swelling  specifically  mark  the  affected locality,  and  thirst  and  inertness  of  the  limbs  add  to the  list  of  his  sufferings.
A  case  of  any  injured  Sira-Marma  (  vital  venal  or arterial  combination  or  plexus  exhibits  the  same symptoms  which  characterise  the  hurting  of  a  single vein,  as  previously  described.  Loss  of  actual  perception (anaesthesia^  and  a  yellowish  colour  of  the  skin  mark the  case  where  the  injury  is  confined  to  the  vital principle  of  the  flesh.
A  patient,  who  is  discreet,  and  is  not  in  a  special hurry  to  end  his  earthly  sojourn,  would  do  well  to shun  the  presence  of  a  bungling,  unskilful  surgeon, who  can  not  even  keep  himself  unhurt  in  the course  of  a  surgical  operation.
246  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      LChap.  xxv.
The  evils,  which  attend  the  obhque  insertion  of  a surgical  instrument,  have  been  described  before  ;  and accordingly  care  should  be  taken  not  to  leave  any  room for  the  occurence  of  those  evils  in  connection  with  a surgical  operation.
The  patient,  who  may  mistrust  his  own  parents,  sons and  relations,  should  repose  an  implicit  faith  in  his  own physician,  and  put  his  own  life  into  his  hands  without the  least  apprehension  of  danger  ;  hence  a  ph5'sician should  protect  his  patient  as  his  own  begotten  child.  A surgical  case  may  yield  to  a  single  incision,  or  may require  two,  three,  four  or  more  than  that  number  to effect  a  cure.  By  doing  good  to  humanity  with  his  pro- fessional skill,  a  physician  achieves  glory,  and  acquires  the plaudits  of  the  good  and  the  wise  in  this  life,  and  shall live  in  Paradise  in  the  next.
Thus  ends  the  twenly-fiflh  Chapter  of  the  Sulrasthimim  in  the  Sushruta Samhita  which  tieats  of  the  eight  forms  of  Surgical  operations.
I
CHAPTER    XXVI.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  treats of  the  exploration  of  splinters  lost  or  deep-seated  in  the organism  (Pranashta-Shalya-Vijna'niya'- madhysryam).
Definition  : — The  term  Shalyam  is  derived from  the  root  "Shala"  or  Shvala"  (to  go  swiftly)  joined to  the  Unadi  affix  "Yat."  Shalyas  may  be  divided  into two  kinds  according  as  they  are  extrinsic  Agantuka) or  idiopathic  (Sharira)  in  their  origin.
A  Shalyam  usually  serves  to  act  as  an  impeding  or obstructing  agent  to  the  entire  organism,  and,  hence,  the science  which  deals  with  its  nature  and  characteristics is  called  the  Shalya-Shastram  (Surgery).  An  idiopathic (Sharira)  Shalyam  may  be  either  a  hair,  nail,  embohsed blood  (Dhatus)*,  etc.,  excrements  (Mala),  or  deranged humours  of  the  body  (Dosha),  while  an  extrinsic Shal3'am  should  be  regarded  as  one  which  afflicts  the body  and  is  originated  from  a  source  other  than  any of  the  preceding  ones,  including  particles  of  iron  and bone,  stems  of  grass,  scrapings  of  bamboo,  and  bits of  horns,  etc.  But  an  Agantuka  (extrinsic)  Shalyam specifically   denotes  an    article   of  iron,   inasmuch  as  it
*  Embolism    and   Thrombosis   have   been  included  within    Shalyam  by the  Ayurvedic  Pathologists.
248
ITHE   SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     1  Chap  xxvi.
pre-eminently  sqvvqs  the  purpose  of  killing  and  is  the most  irresistible  of  all  metals.  Since  any  amount  of sharpness  can  be  imparted  to  the  point  of  an  article made  of  iron  and  since  it  can  be  easily  discharged from  a  distance,  iron  is  the  metal  exclusively  chosen in  the  construction  of  darts  or  arrows.
Classification  of  Shafts  :  — Arrows  (Shara) may  be  divided  into  two  classes  according  as  they  are feathered  or  unfeathered  ;  and  their  barbs  are  usually constructed  in  the  shape  of  trees,  leaves,  flowers,  or fruits,  or  are  made  to  resemble  the  mouths  of  birds  and wild  and  ferocious  animals.
Flights  of  arrows: — The  flights  or  direc- tions of  an  arrow  (Shalyam)  may  be  divided  into  five different  kinds,  such  as  the  upward,  the  downward,  the backward  (coming  from  the  back),  the  oblique  and  the straight.  Either  through  its  diminished  momentum,  or through  any  external  resistance,  an  arrow  may  drop down  and  penetrate  into  the  skin,  arteries,  or  any internal  channel  of  the  body,  or  into  any  bone  or  its cavity,  causing  a  wound  or  an  ulcer  (Vrana)  at  the  spot of  its  penetration.
Symptoms  : — Now  hear  me  describe  the  symp- toms which  are  exhibited  in  connection  with  an  arrow- wound    (Shalya*-Vrana).    These     symptoms     may   be
*  An  arrow  or  an  iron  barb,  from  "Shala"  to  kill.
Chap.  XXVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  249
grouped  under  two  sub-heads,  such  as  the  specific  and the  general.  The  general  characteristics  are  as follows  : — The  ulcer,  which  is  marked  by  pain  and swelling  and  presents  a  raised  or  bloated  aspect  like a  water  bubble,  assumes  a  dark  brown  hue  and  appears soft  to  the  touch.  The  seat  of  the  ulcer  is  seen  to  be studded  over  with  pustular  eruptions  and  a  constant bleeding  sets  in  from  its  inside.  The  specific  symptoms, which  mark  a  Shalyam  lodged  in  the  skin,  are  the  hard- ness and  extended  character  of  the  local  swelling  and the  darkness  (discolouring)  of  its  skin.
In  a  case  where  the  arrow  Shalyam)  is  lodged  in  the flesh,  the  swelling  increases  in  size  and  the  incidental ulcer  refuses  to  be  healed  and  cannot  bear  the  least pressure.  Suppuration  sets  in  and  the  ulcer  is  charac- terised by  a  sort  of  sucking  pain.*
All  the  preceding  symptoms,  with  the  exception of  swelling  and  sucking  pain  fthirst  according  to others),  manifest  themselves  in  a  case  where  the  arrow (Shalyam)  has  penetrated  into  a  muscle.  Similarly,  the distension,  aching  and  swelhng  of  a  vein  mark  a  case of  an  arrow-lodged  vein.  An  upheaval  and  swelling of  its  fibres  together  with  intense  pain  characterise a  case  where  the  shaft  (Shalyam)  has  lodged  in  a ligament.     The  internal  passages  or  channels  (Srota)   of
*  According  to  certain  authorities    the  patient  is    tormented  with  a    sort of  unquenchable  thirst.
?>2
250  THE  SUSHRUT.A  SAMHITA'.       [  Chap,  xxvi,
the  body  are  choked  up  and  become  inoperative,  when the  shaft  is  lodged  in  any  one  of  them.  A  flow  of  red and  frothy  blood  with  a  gurghng  sound,  accompanied by  thirst,  nausea,  and  aching  of  the  limbs,  sets  in when  the  arrow  is  lodged  in  an  artery  (Dhamani). Similarly,  pain  and  swelling  of  diverse  kinds  mark  a case  where  the  shaft  is  embedded  in  a  bone.  The appearance  of  goose  flesh  on  the  skin,  a  stuffed sensation  inside  the  cavity  of  the  affected  bone,  and a  violent  piercing  bone-ache,  mark  a  case  where  the shaft  has  found  a  lodgment  inside  the  cavity  of  a bone.  A  pierced  joint  exhibits  the  same  symptoms as  described  in  connection  with  an  arrow-lodged bone,  with  the  exception  that  the  patient  is  incapable of  flexing  and  expanding  the  affected  joint.  In  a case  where  the  shaft  (Shalyam)  has  lodged  in  the abdomen  (Koshtha),  the  bowels  become  constipated ;  the abdomen  becomes  distended  with  a  rumbling  in  the  in- testines and  the  suppression  of  flatus  and  urine  ;  and ingested  food  matter,  as  well  as  urine  and  feces  are found  to  ooze  out  of  the  fissure  or  mouth  of  the  ulcer. Symptoms,  similar  to  those  above  described,  manifest themselves  when  the  arrow  is  lodged  in  any  of  the vital  parts  (Marmas'i  of  the  body.  The  preceding symptoms  are  but  faintly  exhibited  in  a  case  of  super- ficial penetration.
An  ulcer  incidental  to  the  penetration   of  an   arrow
Chap.  XXVI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  25 1
(Shalyam"),  along  the  direction  of  the  local  hair,  in*  the throat,  in  any  internal  channel  of  the  body,  or  in  a  vein, the  skin,  or  a  muscle,  or  into  a  cavity  of  the  bone,  and not  in  any  way  affected  by  the  action  of  the  deranged bodily  humours,  may  speedily  and  spontaneously  heal ; but  it  may  break  open  and  become  painful  afresh  if  the bodily  humours  become  deranged  and  aggravated  by  a blow  or  physical  exercise.
Localisation  :— The  exact  position  of  a  shaft (Shalyam)  embedded  in  the  skin  should  be  ascertained by  applying  a  plaster  composed  of  clay,  Masha-pulse, Yava,  Godhuma  and  cow-dung  over  the  injured  limb or  part.  The  part  (hmb)  should  be  duly  lubricated with  oil,  and  diaphorised  (by  fomenting  or  applying heat  to  its  surface)  before  the  plaster  is  applied.  The shaft  (Shalyam)  should  be  considered  as  lodged  in  that part  which  would  be  marked  by  pain,  redness,  or  swelling (Samrambha)  after  such  application.  x\s  an  alterna- tive, the  affected  part  should  be  plastered  with  clarified butter,  common  clay  and  sandal  paste.  The  embedded shaft  (Shalyam)  is  then  exactly  located  at  the  spot where,  owing  to  the  heat  of  the  affected  part,  the clarified  butter,  or  earth,  or  sandal  paste  would  be found  to  have  melted,  or  dried  up.
Similarly,  the  mode  of  localising  a  shaft  (Shalyam),
*     So  as  not  to  obstruct  the   coursing   of  the    blood   or   serum   in    the locality.
252  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       ;  Chap.  XXVI.
embedded  in  the  flesh  is  as  follows  : — First,  the  patient should  be  duly  lubricated  and  diaphorised  with  medi- cinal agents  suited  to  the  requirements  of  his  case. Then,  the  part  or  the  limb  having  been  thus  reduced with  depletive  measures,  the  shaft  would  be  found  to have  been  dislodged  from  its  seat  and  to  be  moving about  (^within  the  deeper  tissues  of  the  affected  part , giving  rise  to  pain,  redness  and  swelling.  In  such  a  case the  exact  location  of  the  shaft  should  be  fixed  at  the spot  where  the  pain  and  swelling,  etc.  would  occur. The  same  measures  should  be  adopted  in  the  case  of  a shaft  (Shalyam)  which  lies  embedded  in  the  cavity  of the  abdomen  (Kostha),  or  in  a  bone,  or  joint,  or  muscle
In  the  case  of  a  Shalyam  lodged  in  a  vein,  in  an artery,  in  any  external  channel  (Srota)  of  the  body,  or in  a  ligament,  the  patient  should  be  made  to  ride  in  a carriage  with  a  broken  or  lopped  oif  wheel  and  dragged up  and  down  in  it  on  an  undulating  road  The  pain  and swelling,  etc.  incidental  to  the  jolting,  would  occur  at that  part  of  his  body,  where  the  shaft  (Shalyam}  is embedded.
In  the  case  of  a  shaft  Shalyam)  lodged  in  a bone,  the  affected  bone  should  be  lubricated  and diaphorised  with  oil  and  heat  respectively,  after  which it  should  be  firmly  pressed  and  bound  up.  The  seat  of the  pain  or  swelling,  caused  by  such  a  procedure,  would mark   the   exact   locality   of    the  embedded   Shalyam.
Chap.  XXVI.  I  SUTRASTHANAM.  253
Similarly,  in  the  case  of  a  shaft  (Shalyam)  lodged  in  a joint,  the  same  lubricating,  diaphorising,  compressing, and  expanding  measures  should  be  adopted,  and  the painful  swelling  caused  thereby  would  indicate  its  exact locality.  No  definite  method  can  be  laid  down  as regards  ascertaining  the  exact  location  of  a  Shalyam lodged  in  any  of  the  vital  parts  of  the  body  (Marma ', inasmuch  as  they  are  co- existing  with  (the  eight  different locations  of  ulcers,  such  as,  the  skin_,  the  flesh,  the bone,  etc.)*
General  rule  : — A  painful  swelling,  occurring at  any  part  of  the  body  and  incidental  to  such  physical or  natural  endeavours  of  the  patient,  as  riding  on  an elephant  or  on  horse-back,  climbing  a  steep  hill,  bendr ing  of  a  bow,  gymnastic  exercises,  running,  wrestling, walking,  leaping,  swimming,  high -jumping,  yawning, coughing,  singing,  expectorating,  eructating,  laughing, practising  of  Pranay^ma  (regulating  the  breath  prelimi- nary to  the  practice  of  Yoga),  or  an  emission  of  semen, urine  or  flatus,  or  defecation,  would  clearly  indicate the  exact  location  of  the  embedded  shaft  (Shalyam).
Authoritative  Verses  on  the  Sub- ject : — The  part  of  the  body,  which  is  marked  by pain  and  swelling,  or  which  seems  heavy  and  is  marked
*  Accordingly  measures  enjoined  to  be  adopted  in  connection  with  a shaft  (Shalyam)  lodged  in  any  one  of  them  should  be  applied  wufati.-: mutandis  to  cases  in  which  these  Marmas  would  be  found  to  be  similarly affected.
254
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [Chap.  XXVi,
by  complete  anaesthesia,  or  the  part  which  the  patient repeatedly  handles,  or  constantly  presses  with  his  own hand,  or  which  exudes  any  sort  of  secretion,  and  is marked  by  a  sort  of  excruciating  pain,  or  which  he involuntarily  withdraws  from,  or  constantly  guards against  (an  imaginary  painful  contact),  should  be regarded  as  clearly  indicative  of  the  exact  location  of the  embedded  Shalyam.
A  physician,  having  tested  with  a  probe  the  cavity of  the  incidental  ulcer  or  the  interior  of  the  affected locality,  and  found  it  to  be  characterised  by  little  pain and  absence  of  any  aching  discomfort  or  unfavour- able symptoms  and  swelling,  after  a  course  of  proper treatment,  and  after  having  been  satisfied  as  to  its healthy  look  and  the  softness  of  its  margin,  and  after having  ascertained  that  any  remnant  of  the  embedded arrow  can  not  be  perceived  with  the  end  of  the  director by  moving  it  to  and  fro,  should  pronounce  it  free  from any  embedded  foreign  matter  (Shalyam),  which  would be  further  confirmed  by  the  full  flexion  and  expansion of  the  affected  limb  or  organ.
A  particle  of  soft  bone,  horn  or  iron,  in  an}' wise lodged  in  the  body,  assumes  an  arched  shape  ;  whereas bits  of  wood,  grass-stems,  or  chips  of  bamboo-bark, under  the  same  circumstances,  putrify  the  blood  and the  local  flesh,  if  not  speedily  extracted  from  their  seats of  1  odgment.     Bits  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  brass,  zinc,  or
Chap.  XXVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  255
lead,  anj'how  inserted  into  a  human  organism,  are  soon melted  by  the  heat  of  the  Pittam  and  are  assimilated and  transformed  into  the  fundamental  principles  of  the body.  Metals  or  substances  of  kindred  softness,  and which  are  naturally  cold,  are  melted  and  become  amal- gamated, under  such  circumstances,  with  the  elements of  the  organism.  A  hair,  or  a  particle  of  hard  bone, wood,  stone,  bamboo  scraping,  or  cla}^  which  remains lodged  in  the  body  as  a  Shalyam,  does  not  melt,  nor undergo  any  change  or  deterioration.
The  physician,  who  is  fully  conversant  with  the five  different  courses  or  flights  of  an  arrow  'Shalyam), whether  feathered  or  unfeathered,  and  has  minutely observed  and  studied  the  symptoms  due  to  its  lodg- ment in  any  of  the  eight  different  seats  of  ulcers  (Vrana) in  the  human  organism  such  as,  the  skin,  etc.),  is  alone worthy  of  attending  on  kings  and  nobles.
Thus   ends    the    twenly-sixth    Chapter    of   the     Sulrasth^nam    in     the Sushruta  Samhit^  which  treats  of  exploration  of  spHnters.
CHAPTER     XXVII.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which deals  with  the  modes  of  extracting  sphnters  (Shalyar-
pa  n  iya- mad  hyaryam) .
There  are  two  kinds  of  Shalyas.  A  Shalya  is either  loose  or  firmly  fixed  to  its  seat  within  the  body. We  shall  presently  speak  of  the  fifteen  different  modes of  extracting  a  loose  Shalyam,  which  are  as  follows,  viz. : Extraction  by  natural  expulsive  functions  of  the  body (Svabhaba),  by  suppuration  or  putrefication  (Pachanam), by  excising  (Bhedanam),  by  bursting  Daranam),  by pressing  ■  Pidanam),  by  rubbing  i^Pramarjananr,  b)''  blow- ing with  the  mouth  of  medicinal  powders  into  the  affect- ed part  (Nirdhmapanam),  by  the  administration  of emetics  (Vamanam),  by  an  exhibition  of  purgatives (Virechanam)  by  washing  (Prakshalanam  ,  by  friction with  the  fingers  (Pratimarsha),  by  straining  as  at the  time  of  defecation  (Pravahanam),  by  sucking (Achushanam),  by  applying  a  magnet  (Ayaskanta)  and by  exhilarating  ;  Harsham).
An  embedded  foreign  matter  is  usually  expelled from  the  eyes,  etc,  by  inducing  lachrymation,  sneezing, eructation,  coughing,  micturition,  defecation,  and the  emission  of  flatus.
A   Shalyam,   or  any  other  foreign  matter  which  has
Chap,  xxvii.^  SUTRASTH/VNAM.  257
penetrated  into  the  deeper  tissues  of  flesh,  should  be extracted  b}'  setting  up  suppuration  in  the  affected locah'ty.  The  putrid  flesh  would  loosen  the  fixture  of  the Shalyam,  the  weight  of  the  secreted  pus  and  blood causing  it  to  drop  down.
The  seat  or  the  locality  of  a  fixed  Shalyam should  be  opened  by  an  incision  in  the  event  of its  not  being  ejected  even  after  the  establishment  of the  local  suppuration.  If  the  Shalyam  fails  to  come  out even  after  the  incision,  the  affected  part  should  be pressed  with  the  fingers,  or  medicines,  endued  with the  virtue  of  exerting  pressure,  should  be  applied over  its  surface.  A  particle  of  an}-  fine  matter, accidentally  dropped  into  the  eye,  should  be  removed with  sprays  of  cold  water,  or  by  blowing  into  it  with the  mouth,  or  by  rubbing  it  with  hair  or  the  fingers.
A  residue  of  digested  food  or  mucous,  a  remnant of  any  food  matter  (Ahdrashesha)  misdirected  into the  nostrils,  or  any  small  splinter  loosely  pricking  thereto CAnu-shalyam),  should  be  expelled  by  breathing  hard, or  by  coughing  upward  through  the  nostrils  (Utk^sha), or  by  blowing  through  the  nose.  A  morsel  of  food, acting  as  an  obstructing  Shalyam  in  the  cavity  of the  stomach  (Am^shaya),  should  be  ejected  by rubbing  (Pratimarsha)  the  fingers  against  the  lining of  the  throat,  or  against  the  region  of  the  epiglottis, while  such  a  morsel  brought  down   into  the  intestines,
33
258  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap,  xxvil.
should    be     evacuated     by     administering     purgatives (Virechanam).
The  pus  or  any  other  morbid  matter  found  within the  cavity  of  an  ulcer  should  be  removed  by  washing it,  while  incarcerated  flatus,  or  obstructed  scybala or  retained  urine,  or  obstructed  foetus,  should  be  borne down  and  expelled  by  means  of  straining.
Any  deranged  Vayu  or  watery  secretion  incarcerated in  anv  part  of  the  body,  as  well  as  poisoned  blood or  vitiated  breast-milk,  should  be  sucked  off  with  the mouth,  or  with  a  horn.
A  loose,  unbarbed  arrow,  lodged  in  a  wound  with a  broad  mouth  and  lying  in  an  Anuloma  direction, should  be  withdrawn  by  applying  a  magnet  to  its end.  A  shaft  of  grief,  driven  into  the  heart  by  any of  the  multifarious  emotional  causes,  should  be  removed by  exhilaration  and  merry-making.
A  shaft  (Shalyam),  whether  large  or  small,  may be  withdrawn  from  its  place  in  either  of  the  two ways  known  as  the  Anuloma  and  Pratiloma.  The Anuloma  consists  in  withdrawing  a  Shalyam  through a  way  other  than  that  of  its  penetration,  while  the contrary  is  called  the  Pratiloma.
A  Shalyam  lodged  in  a  place  lying  close  to  the spot  of  its  penetration  (Arvacheenam)  should  be extracted  through  the    wav  bv    which    it   has   entered
Chap.  XXVII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
259
(Pratiloma).  On  the  other  hand,  a  shaft  or  Shalyam, piercing  deep  into  any  part  of  the  body,  but  not coming  out  by  the  other  side  (Par^cheenam),  should be  drawn  out  through  a  way  other  than  that  of  its penetration  (Anuloma).
A  shaft,  piercing  deep  into  any  part  of  the  body so  as  to  reach  the  other  side  of  the  wounded  hmb or  part,  (but  not  cutting  out  clean  through  it  owing to  the  diminution  of  its  original  momentum),  and remaining  protruded  in  the  heaved  up  flesh,  should be  extracted  through  a  channel  other  than  that  by which  it  has  originally  penetrated  (Anuloma),  and  by stirring  or  striking  it  with  the  hand  or  a  hammer. The  heaved  up  flesh  should  be  opened  with  an  incision, when  found  possible  of  being  so  opened,  and  the embedded  Shalyam  should  be  drawn  out  by  stirring  or striking  it  with  the  hand  as  laid  down  before.
A  Shalyam,  lodged  in  any  soft  part  of  the  abdomen, chest,  arm-pits,  inguinal  regions  or  ribs,  should  not  be cut  open  or  struck  with  hammer,  but  should  be  tried  to be  removed  with  the  hands  through  the  wa)-  of  its penetration  (Pratiloma),  in  failure  whereof  the  Shalyam should  be  extracted  with  surgical  appliances  (Shastra) or  any  other  surgical  instruments  ( Yantras),
Authoritative  Verse  on  the  Sub- ject : — A  patient,  fainting  away  (during  the  course of  such  a   surgical  operation),  should  be  enlivened  by
26o  THR  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.     :  Chap.  XXVli.
dashing  cold  water  over  his  face.  He  should  be  solaced with  many  a  hopeful  and  cheering  word,  and  a  nourish- ing diet  such  as,  milk,  etc.  should  be  given  him,  and his   vital  parts  should  be  protected.
Then  having  extracted  the  Shalyam,  the  incidental wound  or  ulcer,  the  blood  having  been  wiped  of,  should be  fomented  with  lieat  or  by  apph'ing  warm  clarified butter  to  its  surface  in  the  event  of  it  being  found  fit  to be  so  treated  i.e.,  'devoid  of  pain  and  unattended  with further  bleeding).  Cauterisation  should  be  resorted  to where  the  condition  of  the  wound  would  indicate  such  a measure.  After  tliat,  the  wound  should  be  plastered (Pradeha)  with  honey  and  clarified  butter,  and  bandaged with  a  piece  of  clean  linen  ;  and  directions  as  to  the diet  and  nursing  of  the  patient  should  be  given  (as previously  laid  down).
A  Shalyam,  lodged  in  a  vein  or  a  ligament  (Snayu), should  be  extracted  with  the  help  of  a  probe.  The shaft  (Shalyam),  lodged  in  the  body  and  lying  buried under  the  incidental  swelling,  should  be  extracted  hy firmly  tying  blades  of  Kuslia  grass  around  its  body. A  shaft  (Shalyam;,  lodged  in  a  spot  situated  anywhere close  to  the  heart,  should  be  withdrawn  by  the  way by  which  it  has  entered ;  and  the  patient  should  be enlivened  with  sprat's  of  cold  water,  etc.  during  the operation.
Chap.  XXVII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'N'AM.  261
A  Shalyam,  lodged  in  any  other  part  of  the  body and  that  is  difficult  to  extract,  and  that  produces  pain and  local  inflammation,  should  be  removed  by  cutting the  part  open.  In  the  case  of  a  shaft  1  Shalyam)  which has  pierced  into  the  cavity  of  a  bone,  the  surgeon  should firmly  press  the  affected  bone  with  his  legs,  and  pull out  the  embedded  shaft  with  all  his  might  by  gripping it  with  a  surgical  instrument,  in  failure  whereof  a strong  man  should  be  asked  to  firmly  catch  hold  of the  patient,  and  the  Shalyam  should  be  pulled  out with  the  help  of  a  gripping  surgical  instrument  as  before.
As  an  alternative,  the  bottom  of  the  shaft  should be  tied  to  the  string  of  a  bow,  strung  and  fully  bent down  ;  and  the  Shalyam  should  be  ejected  with  the means  of  a  full  twang.  As  an  alternative,  a  horse should  be  harnessed  in  the  fashion  known  as  the Panch^ngi-vandhanam  (lit.  bound  in  the  five  parts  of  the body),  and  the  end  of  the  Shalyam  should  be  bent  down and  tied  to  the  bridle.  Then  the  horse  should  be so  whipped  as  to  raise  its  head  first,  thus  pulling  out the  embedded  shaft  .Shalyam)  from  its  seat  of  lodg- ment by  the  jerk  of  its  head.  As  an  alternative,  a high  and  tough  bough  of  a  tree  should  be  lowered  down and  tied  to  the  bent  end  of  the  shaft  as  in  the preceding  case.  The  bough  should  be  then  let  loose, thus  pulling  out  the  shaft  (Shalyam /  with  its  rebounding force.
262  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [Chap.  XXVII.
A  shaft  (Shalyam),  lodged  in  a  bone  and  lying  pro- truded in  the  heaved  up  local  flesh  (situated  in  a  place other  than  the  inguinal  regions,  abdomen,  or  arm-pits, etc.),  should  be  stirred  by  striking  it  on  the  head  with an  Asthila  a  round  stone, — a  short  hammer  according to  certain  authorities),  or  with  a  stone  or  hammer,  and should  be  taken  out  by  the  way  of  its  penetration.
The  feather  of  a  barbed  shaft,  lying  embedded  in  a bone  situated  at  a  part  of  the  organism  where  the existence  of  such  a  foreign  matter  is  calculated  not to  create  any  special  discomfort,  should  be  first  crushed by  putting  pressure  on  the  heaved  up  or  protruded flesh,  and  the  shaft  then  should  be  gently  pulled  out of  its  seat  of  lodgment.
In  the  case  of  a  bit  of  shellac  being  accidentally pricked  into  the  pharynx,  a  metal  tube  should  be  first inserted  into  the  passage,  and  then  a  heated  metallic rod  should  be  reached  down  to  the  obstructing  shellac through  its  inside.  The  shellac,  thus  melted  by  the heat  of  the  inserted  rod,  would  naturally  stick  fast  to it,  which  should  be  then  condensed  by  an  injection  of cold  water  poured  down  through  the  aforesaid  tube  ; after  that  the  rod  should  be  withdrawn  thus  carrying away  the  melted  shellac  at  its  end.
According  to  certain  authorities,  any  other  obstruct- ing foreign  matter  accidentally  introduced  into  the pharynx  should  be  withdrawn  with  the  help   of  a   rod,
Chap.  XXVII.  1  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  263
soaked  in  melted  wax  or  shellac,  and  then  inserted  into that  passage,  all  other  procedure  being  the  same  as  in the  preceding  instance.
In  the  case  of  a  bone  Shalyam  (such  as  the  bone of  fish  etc.)  having  accidentally  stuck  fast  in  the throat,  a  bundle  of  hair,  tied  to  a  string  of  thread, should  be  inserted  into  the  gullet  of  the  patient,  the physician  holding  the  other  end  of  the  string  in  his hand.  Then  a  copious  quantity  of  water,  or  of  any other  liquid  substance,  should  be  poured  down  into  his throat,  so  as  to  entirely  fill  his  stomach.  After  that some  kind  of  emetic  should  be  given  to  the  patient, and  the  string  should  be  pulled  out  as  soon  as  the bundle  of  hair  would  be  felt  to  have  struck  below  the obstructing  bone  or  Shalyam,  which  would  naturally come  out  with  the  pull.  As  an  alternative,  the  top end  of  a  soft  twig,  as  is  generally  used  in  cleansing the  teeth,  should  be  bruised  into  the  shape  of  a  brush, and  the  thorn  or  the  Shalyam  should  be  removed  with its  help.  The  incidental  wound  should  be  treated  by making  the  patient  lick  a  compound  of  clarified butter  and  honey,  or  of  the  powders  of  the  Triphal^, saturated  with  honey  and  sugar.
The  body  of  the  patient  should  be  pressed  or  rubbed, or  he  should  be  whirled  round  by  the  ankles,  or  general- ly measures,  calculated  to  induce  vomiting,  should  be adopted   in  a   case  where  he    would  be  found   to   have
264  THE  SUSHRUTA    SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XXVIt.
swallowed  a  stomachful  of  water  (as  in  a  case  of  drown- ing). As  an  alternative,  he  should  be  buried  under  the ashes  up  to  his  chin.
Strong  wine  should  be  given  to  the  patient,  or  he should  be  slapped  on  the  shoulders,  so  as  to  cause  him to  suddenly  start  in  a  case  where  a  morsel  of  food  would be  found  to  have  obstructed  and  stuck  fast  in  his  gullet. A  tight  gripe  about  the  throat  of  a  person  with  a  creeper, rope  or  the  arm  of  an  antagonist,  tends  to  enrage  the local  (Kapham),  which  obstructs  the  cavity  of  the passage  (Srota)  producing  salivation,  foaming  at  the mouth  and  loss  of  consciousness.  The  remedy  in  such cases  consists  in  lubricating  and  diaphorising  the  body of  the  patient  with  oil  and  heat,  and  in  administering strong  errhines  (Shiro-Virechanam),  and  the  juice  or extract  of  meat  which  is  possessed  of  the  virtue  of subduing  the  deranged  Vayu.
Authoritative  Verses  on  the  Sub- ject:— An  intelligent  physician  should  remove  a Shalvam  with  due  regard  to  its  shape,  location  and  the adaptability  of  the  different  types  of  surgical  instru- ments to  the  case  under  treatment.  A  physician  should exercise  his  own  discretion  in  extracting  feathered shafts  (Shalyas)  from  their  seats  of  lodgment,  as  well as  those  that  are  difficult  of  extraction.
A  physician  is  at  liberty  to  exercise  his  own  skill and  wisdom,  and  to  devise  his  own  original   means  for
Chap.  XXVII.  ]  SUTR.ASTHA'NAM.  265
the  extraction  of  a  Shalyam  with  the  help  of  any surgical  instruments  when  the  abovesaid  measures would  prove  abortive.  A  Shalyam,  not  removed  from the  bod}'-  and  left  in  its  place  of  lodgment,  brings  on swelling,  suppuration,  mortification  of  the  affected  part, and  a  sort  of  excruciating  pain,  and  may  ultimately lead  to  death.  Hence  a  physician  should  spare  no  pain to  extract  a  Shalyam  from  its  seat  of  lodgment.
Thus    ends    the    twenty-seventh  Chapter    of  ihe    Sutraslh^nain    in    the Sushruta  SamhitS,  which  treats  of  extraction  nf  Shalvam.
34
CHAPTER    XXVIII.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which  deals with  the  fa\ourable  or  unfavourable  prognosis  of  an  ulcer. ( Viparitarviparita  -  Vrana  -  Vijna^niya  - madhyaryam ).
IVIetrical  Text  :— Certain  fatal  or  unfavourable symptoms  (Arishtas)*  unmistakably  presage  the  death of  an  ulcer-patient,  as  a  flower,  smoke  and  cloud respectively  herald  a  fruit,  fire  and  rain.  In  most  cases, the  ignorant  cannot  interpret  aright  these  fatal  symp- toms owing  to  their  extremely  subtile  nature,  or  out  of ignorance  or  stupidity,  or  because  such  symptoms  are very  closely  followed  by  the  death  of  the  patient.
These  fatal  indications  serve  as  sure  precursors of  death  in  a  patient,  unless  warded  off  by  the blessings  of  hoi}'  Brahmanas,  who  are  free  from low  desires  or  animal  propensities,  and  are  also accustomed  to  practise  the  Yo^a  and  other  religious penances  ;  or  death  may  be  averted  with  the  help  of men  who  are  initiated  into  the  mystery  of  concocting life-giving  elixirs  (Rasayanam".
*  The  symptoms  which  are  developed  by  the  deranj^ed  bodily  humours in  the  organism  of  a  man  at  a  time  when  they  have  passed  beyond  all medical  cure,  and  when  the  body  serves  as  a  mere  passive  back-ground for  those  phenomena,  awaiting  its  impending  dissolution,  are  called Ariahtas,
Chap.  XXVIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  267
Man}''  such  indications  do  not  prove  instantly  fatal but  bring  on  death  in  course  of  time,  just  as  diseases, supposed  b}'  some  to  be  due  to  the  influence  of  malig- nant planets,  take  time  before  they  become  patent  out of  their  incubative  stages.  An  attempt  to  cure  a  doomed patient  is  only  repaid  by  failure  and  the  ridicule  of  the world,  and  hence  an  intelligent  physician  should  make it  worth  his  while  to  carefully  observe  and  study  these fatal  indications.  A  contrariety  of  the  natural  smell, colour,  taste,  (sensation,  sound,  touch,  etc.)  of  an  ulcer indicates  a  near  and  fatal  termination  of  the  disease.
An  ulcer  emits  a  pungent,  sharp,  or  fishy  smell  under the  respective  influences  of  the  deranged  Vayu,  Pittam and  Kapham.  An  ulcer,  deranged  by  the  action  of the  vitiated  blood,  emits  a  smell  like  that  of  iron (Loha-gandhi),  while  one,  originated  through  the concerted  action  of  the  deranged  humours,  emits  a smell  characterised  by  the  distinctive  features  of  each of  them.  On  the  other  hand,  an  ulcer,  due  to  the  joint action  '^of  the  deranged  Vayu  and 'Pittam),  emits  a  smell like  that  of  fried  paddy  ;  one,  due  to  the  action  of the  deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham,  emits  a  smell  like that  of  linseed  oil ;  whereas  one,  brought  about  by the  action  of  the  deranged  Pittam  and  Kapham,  smells like  sesamum  oil.  All  those  odours,  marked  by  a somewhat  fishy  character,  should  be  deemed  the  natural odours  of  ulcers,  and  any  other  smell  should  be  held  as a  contrary  or  unnatural  one.
268  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XX\  111.
An  ulcer  emitting  a  sweet  smell  like  that  of  wine, or  fragrant  aloe  wood  (Aguru),  clarified-butter,  Jati flower,  Champaka,  sandal,  lotus  or  any  celestial  flower (Divyagandha),  should  be  regarded  as  the  precursor  of death.  Similarly,  a  smell  like  the  one  which  character- ises a  dog,  horse,  mole,  crow  or  a  bug,  or  like  the  one emitted  by  dry,  putrid  meat,  or  resembling  the  smell  of earth  or  slime,  should  be  likewise  deemed  unfavourable or  fatal  in  an  ulcer.
A  physician  should  give  up  a  case  where  an  ulcer, though  it  has  assumed  a  blackish,  saffron  or  Kankustha colour  (a  sort  of  mountain  earth)  through  the  action of  the  aggravated  Pittam,  is  divested  of  the  burning, sucking  and  drawing  pain,  which  is  peculiar  to  that morbiferous  diathesis.  Similarly,  an  ulcer,  which,  though brought  about  through  the  action  of  the  deranged Kapham,  has  become  cold,  hard  and  whitish  as  natural in  one  of  the  Kaphaja  type,  should  be  given  up  as  soon as  it  is  marked  by  a  burning  pain.  Likewise  an  ulcer, due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  V^iyu,  and  characterised by  a  blackish  hue  and  a  thin  secretion,  and  which  is found  to  invade  the  vital  principles  of  the  body,  should be  abandoned  by  a  physician,  whenever  found  to  be entirely  devoid  of  pain.
An  ulcer,  which  makes  a  gurgling  or  groaning  sound, or  one  which  is  characterised  by  an  extreme  burn- ing  sensation,   oris   confined  to  the  skin  and  the  flesh,
Chap.  XXVIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  269
and  is  marked  by  the  emission  of  wind  with  a  loud report,  is  sure  to  have  a  fatal  termination.  Likewise, one,  which  is  characterised  by  extreme  pain,  though not  otherwise  seated  about  any  of  the  vital  parts  of  the body,  or  which  is  cold  on  the  surface,  though  attended with  an  extremely  burning  sensation  in  its  inside  and vice  versa,  should  be  deemed  the  precursor  of  death. Similarly,  an  ulcer  should  be  regarded  as  fatal,  that  is shaped  like  the  barb  of  a  spear,  or  a  Kunta  (a  kind of  barbed  dart  or  spear),  or  like  a  banner,  chariot, horse,  or  an  elephant,  or  like  a  cow,  an  ox,  a  temple, or  a  palace.
A  wise  physician,  witli  any  regard  to  his  own  repu- tation, should  abandon  a  patient  laid  up  with  an  ulcer which  appears  to  have  been  dusted  over  with  a  sort  of pulverised  crust,  or  who  has  been  suffering  from  one  ac- companied by  loss  of  flesh  and  strength,  cough,  difficult respiration  and  aversion  to  food.  An  ulcer,  which occurring  at  any  of  the  vital  parts  of  the  body  secretes a  copious  quantity  of  pus  and  blood,  and  refuses  to be  healed  even  after  a  course  of  proper  and  persistent medical  treatment,  is  sure  to  have  a  fatal  termination.
Thus  ends  the  twenty-eighth  Chapter  of  the  SutrasthSnam  in  the Sushruta  SamhitS,  which  deals  with  the  favourable  and  unfavourable prognosis  of  ulcers.
CHAPTER   XXIX.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which treats  of  favourable  or  unfavourable  prognosis  in diseases,  as  known  from  messengers,  omens  and  dreams etc.  (Viparitarviparita-Duta-Shakuna- Svapna-  Nidarshaniya-madhyaryam).
IVIctrical  Texts:— The  favourable  or  unfavour- able termination  of  a  disease  may  be  predicted  from the  appearance,  speech,  dress  and  demeanour  of  the messenger  sent  to  call  in  a  physician,  or  from  the nature  of  the  asterism  and  the  lunar  phase  marking the  time  of  his  arrival,  or  from  the  direction  of  the wind  (Anila)  blowing  at  the  time,  or  from  the  nature of  omens  (Shakuna)  seen  by  him  on  the  road,  or  from the  posture,  temperament  or  speech  of  the  physician himself.
A  messenger  belonging  to  the  same  caste  as  the patient*  should  be  regarded  as  an  auspicious  omen, whereas  one  from  a  different  caste  would  indicate  a fatal  or  an  unfavourable  termination  of  the  disease,
A   eunuch,   a   husband  of  many  wives,  a  messenger
*  A  P^shanda   messenger   should   be   despatched  to   call  in  a  physician
where   a   member   of  the   same   community  would  fall  ill ;   a  householder,
in  the  case  of  a  patient  of  the  same  social  order  ;  a  BrShmana,  in    the  case
of  a   BrShmana   patient,   and   so   on  ;  while   an   infringement   of  the  rule
would  be  looked  upon  as  an  evil  omen.
Chap.  XXIX.  ]  StJTRAStHANAM.  ^fl
sent  on  a  different  errand  and  incidentally  calling  at  a physician's  house,  or  one  who  has  quarrelled  on  the  road, or  messengers  who  come  riding  on  camels,  donkeys  or in  carts,  or  on  foot  in  one  unbroken  line,  should  be looked  upon  as  inauspicious  messengers.
Similarly,  messengers,  who  call  at  the  house  of  a physician,  holding  in  their  hands  a  rope,  club,  or any  other  weapon,  or  who  come  dressed  in  blacky  red, yellow,  wet,  dirty  or  torn  garments,  or  with  the  upper sheets  placed  or  arranged  on  their  right  shoulders (Apasavya),  or  clad  in  single  cloths  without  such  upper sheets  on,  as  well  as  those,  who  are  possessed  of  addi- tional or  smaller  number  of  limbs,  or  look  disturbed  and agitated,  or  whose  bodies  are  in  any  way  mutilated  or such,  as  look  fierce  and  haughty,  or  speak  in  a  rough and  harsh  tone,  or  utter  any  term  implying  death, should  be  regarded  as  augurs  of  evil.
Likewise^  a  messenger,  tearing  off  a  blade  of  grass  or a  chip  of  wood  with  his  fingers,  or  handling  the  tip of  his  nose  or  the  nipples  of  his  breast,  or  pulling  the ends  of  his  cloth  or  hair,  or  the  ring-finger  of  his hand,  or  brushing  his  nails  and  hair,  or  standing with  his  fingers  in  his  ears  or  nostrils,  or  waiting with  his  hands  placed  on  his  cheeks,  chest  or  head, or  about  the  regions  of  the  arm-pits,  as  well  as one,  who  has  arrived  at  the  house  of  the  physician with  bits  of  human  skull  or  stone,  or  with  ashes,  bones,
272         "     THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XXIX.
paddy  husks  or  charcoal  in  the  palms  of  his  hands,  or one,  who  digs  into  the  earth  with  his  toe-nails,  or wantonly  breaks  stones  or  brickbats,  while  waiting at  the  physician's  house,  should  be  regarded  as  a messenger  of  evil  augury.
A  messenger,  who  at  the  time  of  visiting  a  physician for  his  professional  help  comes  smeared  with  oil,  or  with red  sandal  paste  or  mud,  and  carries  a  red  garland  or  a ripe  but  sapless  fruit,  or  any  other  thing  of  like  nature in  his  hand,  or  brushes  together  the  nails  of  his  fingers or  touches  his  legs  with  the  hand,  or  carries  a  shoe in  his  hand,  or  who  appears  to  have  been  suffering  from a  foul  or  loathsome  disease,  further  one,  who  breathes heavily,  or  weeps  or  behaves  contrarily,  or  stands  with the  palms  of  his  hands  united  and  his  face  turned  to- waids  the  south,  or  waits  on  one  leg  on  an  uneven ground  with  the  other  raised  and  placed  on  a  higher support,  should  be  looked  upon  as  the  precursor  of evil.
A  messenger,  reporting  his  errand  to  the  physician while  he  is  facing  the  south,  or  who  is  in  an  unclean state  of  the  body,  or  engaged  in  kindling  a  fire  or  in killing  an  animal,  or  is  remaining  in  a  nude  state,  or  is found  to  be  lying  on  the  bare  floor  of  his  chamber,  or performing  an  afiection  after  attending  to  a  call  of nature,  or  anointing  himself  with  oil,  or  perspiring,  or sitting  with  his  hair  dishevelled,  or  in  a  state  of  mental
[Chap.  XXIX.  sOtrasthanam.  27;
perturbation,   is  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  messenger  fore- boding evil.
A  messenger,  seeking  the  interview  of  a  physician M'hile  he  is  engaged  in  offering  oblations  to  his  departed manes,  or  to  the  gods,  or  one  who  calls  on  him  at  noon or  at  midnight,  at  morning  or  at  evening,  or  during  the happening  of  any  abnormal  physical  phenomenon,  or  at an  hour  under  the  influence  of  any  of  the  following asterisms  (lunar  mansions),  viz.  the  Ardra,  the  Ashlesa, the  Maghd,  the  Mula,  the  two  Purvas,  and  the  Bharani, or  on  the  day  of  the  fourth,  ninth,  or  the  sixth  phase of  the  moon  (whether  on  the  wane  or  on  the  increase), as  well  as  on  the  last  days  of  months  and  fortnights, should  be  considered  as  a  messenger  of  evil  augury.
A  messenger,  hot  and  perspiring  from  being  seated near  a  blazing  fire,  and  calling  upon  a  physician  in  the midday,  should  be  deemed  as  an  inauspicious  one in  the  case  of  a  Pittaja  distemper  ;  whereas  a messenger  of  similar  description  should  be  looked  upon as  foreboding  the  favourable  termination  of  a  disease,  if due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Kapham.  The  favour- able character  of  a  messenger  should  be  likewise  deter- mined in  diseases  originated  through  the  action  of  the deranged  Vayu,*  etc.  ;  and  an   intelligent   physician    is
*  A  messenger,  visitin;;  a  |)liy.sician  in  ihe  afternoon  or  during  a  hea\}' rain  or  storm,  or  at  a  time  when  the  vital  wind  is  naturally  disturijed  and agitated,  indicates  an  unfavouraljlc  prognosis.
274
THE  SUSHKUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XXIX.
at  liberty  to  exercise  his  own  discretion  in  determining the  omen.  Similarly  in  a  case  of  haemoptysis,  dysentery or  any  morbid  discharge  from  the  urethra  (Prameha  j, the  first  interview  between  a  messenger  and  a  physician near  a  reservoir  of  water  is  an  omen  of  happy  augury, A  learned  physician  shall  tluis  determine  the  ominous character  of  a  messenger  in  connection  with  other diseases  as  well.
IVIessengers  of  happy  augury  :— A  fair
and  handsome  messenger,  who  is  clad  in  clean  and  white garments,  and  belongs  to  the  same  caste  or  spiritual clan  (Svagotraj  as  the  patient  himself,  forebodes  the  suc- cessful termination  of  the  disease  (for  which  the  medical aid  is  needed).  A  messenger,  calling  on  a  physician  either on  foot  or  in  a  bullock  cart,  and  who  is  contented, intelligent,  capable  of  acting  according  to  the  rules  of decorum,  time  and  circumstances,  and  is  independent  and original  in  his  thoughts  and  ideas,  and  carries  ornaments, and  other  auspicious  articles  about  his  person,  is  alone capable  of  rendering  the  best  services  in  connection with  the  calling  in  of  a  physician.  A  messenger,  for  the first  time,  interviewing  a  physician,  when  the  latter  is complacently  seated  with  his  face  towards  the  east,  and on  a  clean  and  even  ground,  should  be  regarded  as  a messenger  of  happy  augury.
Raw    meat,   a    pitcher   full    of  water,    an  umbrella, a  Bramhana,  an  elephant,  a  cow,  an  ox   and   an   article
Chap.  XXIX.  ]  SUTKASTHANAM.  275
of  a  white  colour,  should  be  deemed  auspicious  sights  by a  physician  on  his  way  ]to  the  house  of  a  patient.  A mother,  a  cow  with  her  calf,  a  small  pitcher  of  water,  a decorated  virgin,  fish,  unripe  fruits,  a  Svastika  (a  cross shaped  religious  insignia),  sweetmeat,  curd,  gold,  a vessel  full  of  sun-dried  rice,  gems,  flowers  (according to  certain  commentators  a  well  disposed  king),  a  blazing fire,  a  horse,  a  swan,  a  peacock,  a  bird  of  the  Chasha species,  chantings  of  Vedic  verses,  claps  of  thunder, blowings  of  conch-shells,  notes  of  lutes,  sounds  of chariot  wheels,  roar  of  lions,  lowings  of  cows  and bullocks,  neighings  of  horses,  trumpeting  of  elephants, cacklings  of  geese,  hootings  of  owls,  and  the  pleasant conversation  of  persons  going  to  the  palace  of  a  king, should  be  regarded  as  lucky  sights  and  sounds  by  a physician  on  his  way  (to  the  house  of  a  patient).
Similarly,  harmonious  melodies  of  birds  chirping on  the  boughs  of  healthy  Kshira  trees,  bent  under the  weight  of  fruit,  and  looking  gladsome  with  their dowry  of  beautiful  blossoms  and  foliage,  or  notes  of birds  perched  on  the  terraces  of  palace  towers  or  on the  tops  of  banner  poles  singing  melodiously,  or  birds following  the  messenger  with  their  songs  or  singing seated  from  the  auspicious  quarters  of  the  heavens,  or following  him  on  his  left,  should  be  equally  regarded as  sights  and  notes  of  happy  foreboding.
A   bird,   seated  on  the  withered  trunk  of  a  blighted
2/6
THR  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA      1  Chap.  xxix.
or  thunder-blasted  tree,  or  on  a  thorny  knoll  covered over  with  creepers,  or  on  ashes  or  stones,  or  amidst ordure  or  husks  of  grain,  or  on  dried  skeletons, and  singing  in  a  harsh  voice  with  its  head  turned towards  the  blazing  or  inauspicious  quarter  of  the sky,  should  be  deemed  as  portending  evil.
Similarly,  birds,  which  are  possessed  of  names  of masculine  terminations  are  happy  omens  if  seen  on the  left  by  a  physician  on  his  way  to  the  house  of a  patient,  while  birds,  on  a  similar  occasion,  whose names  have  feminine  endings,  are  auspicious  if  seen bv  him  on  the  right.  A  dog  or  a  jackal,  seen  run- ning from  the  right  to  the  left,  is  a  hapjn-  omen, and  so  is  a  mongoose  or  a  Chasha  bird  if  seen  on  the left.  A  hare,  a  serpent,  or  an  owl,  seen  on  either  side of  the  road,  is  an  inauspicious  sight.  The  sight  and the  sound  of  a  Godha  or  a  Krikal^sha  an  animal  of of  the  lizard  species)  are  both  inauspicious.
If  a  man,  other  than  a  messenger  of  inauspicious character  but  possessed  of  features  alike  unfavourable, should  happen  to  cross  the  way  of  a  physician,  just starting  on  a  professional  call,  he  should  be  regarded as  equallv  indicative  of  evil.  The  sight  of  a  vessel full  of  Kulutha  pulse,  or  of  husks  of  grain,  or  of  stone, ashes,  clay  or  charcoal,  or  of  oil,  is  inauspicious. Similarly,  the  sight  of  a  vessel  filled  with  red  mustard or   witli    wine   other   than    whicli    is     clear    and   mild
Chap.  XXIX.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  277
(Prasanna)    should    be     deemed    an     omen     of    evil augury.
Similarly,  the  sight  of  a  parched  corpse,  or  of  a withered  tree  or  Pal^sha  branch,  is  equally  inauspicious. A  physician,  meeting  a  member  of  any  of  the  vile  or degraded  castes  or  a  blind  or  indigent  person,  or  a  man inimically  disposed  towards  him,  should  consider  the character  of  the  disease  to  be  unfavourable.
A  gentle,  cool  and  fragrant  breeze,  blowing  from the  direction  of  his  destination,  should  be  regarded  as an  auspicious  omen  by  a  physician.  A  wind,  which is  hot,  dry,  and  is  charged  with  the  fetid  exalations of  putrid  matter,  and  which  blows  from  the  direction of  his  starting  point,  should  be  regarded  as  an  evil omen.
The  word  "cut,"  used  by  another  and  accidentallv heard  by  a  physician  fon  his  wa^O  to  the  bed-side  of  a patient  laid  up  with  Granthi  (aneurism)  or  Arvuda (tumour),  should  be  regarded  as  a  good  omen  ;  while  the term  "open",  heard  under  similar  circumstances  and  in connection  with  a  case  of  Vidradhi  (abscess),  or  Gulma (abdominal  gland\  or  Udara  (ascites),  should  be  regarded as  an  equally  auspicious  portent.  Similarly,  the  term "stopped"  is  commended  in  a  case  of  dysenter}'  or haemoptysis.  Thus  the  physician  should  interpret the  auguries  according  to  the  nature  of  each  individual case.
278  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XXIX
A  curse,  imprecation,  or  wailing  like  "woe  to  me", as  well  as  sobs,  groans,  reports  of  defecation  or  vomit- ing, the  brayings  of  an  ass,  the  frightened  sound  of a  camel,  an  obstacle  or  impediment  in  the  path  of a  physician,  or  a  sudden  breakage,  collapse,  or  the falling  of  any  article  from  a  cupboard,  and  a  sad or  dejected  spirit  of  the  physician  without  any  assign- able cause,  should  be  regarded  as  evil  omens  at  the time  of  his  starting.
These  omens  should  be  observed  or  attended  to at  the  time  of  first  entering  the  house  of  a  patient, or  at  the  threshold  or  within  its  walls,  but  not  after the  physician  has  once  commenced  the  medical  treat- ment. The  sight  of  a  knot  of  torn  hairs,  ashes,  bones, wood,  stone,  husks  of  grain,  cotton,  thorns,  a  bedstead with  its  legs  upturned,  wine,  water,  fat,  oil,  sesamum, dried  grass,  straw,  a  eunuch,  a  deformed  person  or  one with  a  broken  limb,  a  nude  man,  or  one  with  a  clean shaved  head,  or  clad  in  a  black  garment,  should  be regarded  as  evil  omens  by  a  physician,  whether  noticed b}'  him  at  the  time  of  starting  or  after  getting  into a  sick  room.  Pots  or  utensils  placed  in  pendent  brackets, and  found  to  be  spontaneously  moving  about  without any  definite  cause,  as  well  as  any  other  fallen  articles digged  in,  smashed  in  or  thrown  out  of  the sick-room  ;  a  ph3^sician  sitting  dejected  and  gathered up  in  his  seat,  and  the  patient  sitting  with  a  down- cast face,   or  pricking  his  body  or   at   the  bed  clothes
Chap.  XXIX.  ]  SUTRASFHANAM.  279
while  talking  with  the  physician,  or  shaking  his  hands, back  or  head,  or  taking  hold  of  or  placing  the  hands of  the  physician  in  his  own,  or  on  his  breast,  or  interro- gating the  physician  with  an  up-turned  face,  or pressing  his  own  limbs,  when  he  is  interrogated  by the  physician  in  return,  should  be  considered  as unfavourable  signs.
The  patient,  in  whose  house  a  physician  is  not duly  honoured,  can  never  rally.  The  due  honouring  of a  physician  leads  to  a  speedy  recoAery.  A  messenger of  good  omen  forebodes  the  favourable  termination of  a  disease,  while  the  contrary  is  indicated  by  a messenger  of  the  opposite  type.  Hence  a  physician shall  carefully  observe  the  ominous  character  of  a messenger  (despatched  to  seek  his  aid  .
Dreams  : — Now  I  shall  describe  the  dreams, which  either  being  dreamt  by  the  patient,  or  by  his relations,  portend  fatal  or  a  successful  close  of  the malady.  The  patient,  who  dreams  of  going  towards the  south  on  the  back  of  an  elephant,  or  on  that  of any  carnivorous  animal,  or  of  riding  on  a  boar  or on  a  buffalo,  or  sees  himself  carried  towards  the quarter  by  a  dark  woman  with  dishevelled  hair  and clad  in  a  blood- red  garment — laughing  and  dancing,  soon meets  his  doom.  A  dream  by  a  patient  that  members  of vile  castes  have  been  drawing  him  southward,  or  that ghosts  or  anchorites  have  been   embracing  him,  or  that
28o  THE  SUSHRUtA  SAMHITA.       Chap.  xxix.
savage  beasts  with  diabolical  faces  have  been  smelling his  head,  predicts  that  his  earthly  days  are  numbered, while  such  dreams  occurring  in  a  healthy  subject indicate  an  impending  disease.
Similarly,  the  patient,  who  dreams  of  drinking  oil  or honey,  or  of  diving  into  a  bed  of  dank  or  oozy  slime, or  of  laughing  and  dancing  mud-besplattered,  is  at  the threshold  of  death.  A  dream  of  ha^*ing  entwined  a wreath  of  red  iiowers  round  one's  head,  though  other- wise nude  or  stripped  of  clothes,  or  of  seeing  reeds, bamboos,  or  palm  trees  growing  on  his  chest,  portends the  impending  death  of  a  patient.  On  the  other hand,  such  dreams,  occurring  in  a  healthy  subject,, forebode  the  advent  of  disease.  I.ikewise,  the  patient, who  dreams  of  being  eaten  up  b}'  fish,  or  who  fancies himself  again  entering  into  the  womb  of  his  mother, or  thinks  he  is  falling  from  the  summit  of  a  mountain  or into  a  dark  and  dismal  cave,  or  as  being  carried  away  by the  current  of  a  river,  or  assailed  and  overwhelmed  by  a pack  of  crows,  is  already  a  doomed  being.  The  dream of  a  clean  shaved  head,  or  of  falling  stars,  or  of  dying lamp  light,  or  of  the  extraction  of  one's  own  eyes,  or  of shaking  divine  images,  or  of  earthquakes,  purgings,  vomit- ings or  falling  out  of  one's  own  teeth,  is  always  fatal. The  patient,  who  dreams  of  climbing  a  Shalmali,  Kinsuka, or  Pari-bhadra  tree,  or  of  ascending  an  ant-hill  or  a funeral  pyre,  or  of  witnessing  himself  bound  to   a   sacri-
Chap.  XXIX.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  281
ficical  stake,  or  of  receiving  or  eating,  cotton, levigated  sesamum  paste, .  iron,  salt,  sesamum,  boiled rice,  or  drinking  oil  or  wine  (Sura),  as  the  case  may  be, should  consider  himself  as  a  doomed  being,  while  such dreams  in  a  healthy  subject  indicate  the  impending attack  of  a  disease.
A  dream  should  be  regarded  as  ineffectual  which is  quite  in  conformity  with  the  physical  temperament  of the  dreamer  (such  as,  one  of  scaling  the  heavens by  a  person  of  Vataja  temperament  ;  one  of  seeing a  blazing  fire,  a  flash  of  lightning,  or  a  meteor-fall by  a  man  of  Pittaja  temperament  ;  and  one  of  wit- nessing reservoirs  of  water,  etc.  by  a  man  of  Kaphaja temperamentj  as  well  as  one  which  has  been  forgotten or  followed  by  another  of  an  auspicious  type  or  is  the outcome  of  premeditated  thought  like  one  dreamt  in the  da}'  time.
A  fever  patient  dreaming  of  friendship  with  a  dog, a  consumptive  one  dreaming  of  making  friends  with  a monkey  or  a  monster  ;  a  hysteric  patient  who  dreams  of making  friendship  with  a  ghost ;  a  Prameha  or  dj'sentery patient  dreaming  of  drinking  water  ;  a  leper  dreaming  of drinking  oil,  or  a  Gulma  patient  dreaming  of  a  tree  grow- on  his  belly,  should  count  his  days  as  numbered.  A  person afflicted  with  any  disease  of  the  head,  and  dreaming of  a  tree  growing  on  his  head,  or  one  suffering  from vomiting  and  dreaming  of  eating   sesamum   cakes  ;  or
36
282  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XXIX.
an  asthma  patient,  or  a  person,  afflicted  with  thirst, dreaming  of  making  a  journey  on  foot  ;  or  a  jaundice patient  dreaming  of  eating  a  food  prepared  with turmeric  ;  or  a  person  suffering  from  hecmoptysis  and dreaming  of  drinking  blood,  should  be  considered  as  about to  depart  this  life.  A  patient  having  had  any  of  the aforesaid  dreams,  under  the  circumstances,  should  get up  in  the  morning  and  make  a  gift  of  Masha-pulse, sesamum,  iron  and  gold  to  the  Brahmanas,  and  repeat the  blessed  Tripada  Gayatri  (Mantras J
Having  dreamt  a  bad  dream  in  the  first  watch  of  the night,  a  person  should  meditate  upon  a  holy  or  auspicious subject,  and  then  lie  down  again  with  all  his  senses  fully controlled,  and  repeat  the  Mantras  sacred  to  any  of  the gods.  An  evil  dream  should  not  be  related  to  another. The  dreamer  of  the  dream  should  reside  in  a  holy temple  for  three  consecutive  nights,,  and  worship  the deity  with  the  most  fervent  devotion,  whereby  its  evil effects  would  become  nullified.
Now  we  shall  describe  the  dreams,  which  are of  auspicious  nature.  Members  of  the  twice  born castes,  gods,  cows,  bullocks,  kings,  one's  own  living friends  and  relations,  a  blazing  fire,  a  Brahmana,  or  a sheet  of  clear  water  seen  in  a  dream  by  a  healthy  person predict  or  predicts  to  him  a  pecuniary  gain  in  the  near future,  while  such  dreams  occurring  in  a  diseased  person indicate    a  speed}'   recovery  of  the  disease  he   has  been
Chap.  XXIX.  ]  SUTKASTHANAM.  28"
suffering  from.  Similarly,  dreams  of  meat,  fish,  garlands of  white  flowers,  cloths  and  fruit  predict  a  gain  or  a speedy  cure,  as  the  case  may  be.
Dreams  of  ascending  the  terrace  of  a  royal palace,  of  climbing  a  tree  or  a  hill,  or  of  riding  an elephant  predict  similar  results  as  above.  A  dream  of one's  sailing  over  a  river,  pool  or  sea  of  turbid  water predicts  a  money  gain  or  cure,  according  as  one  is healthy  or  diseased.  A  dream  of  having  been  bit or  stung  by  a  serpent,  by  leeches,  or  by  a  bee,  indicates bliss  or  cure,  according  to  one's  good  or  bad  health at  the  time.  The  man,  who  usually  gets  such  auspicious dreams,  should  be  looked  upon  as  a  long-lived  man, and  may  be  unhesitatingly  taken  under  medical treatment   by  a  physician.
Thus  ends  the  Uventy-nintli  Chapter  of  the  Sutiasthinam  in  the Sushruta  SamhitS,  which  deals  with  favourable  or  unfavourable  prognosis from  messengers,  birds,  omens  etc.
CHAPTER    XXX.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  treats
of  the  prognosis  that  can  be  obtained  from  the  perverted
functions   of  the     five     sense    organs     ( Pane  he  n-
d  riyartha- Vi  prati  pattf  -  madhyaryam) .
Metrical  texts  ; — A  perversion  or  contrariety of  the  functions  of  the  mind  or  brain  (Shilam),  and of  the  organs  of  sense-perception,  is  called  Arishtam (an  unfavourable  symptom  foreboding  death).  Now hear  me  describe,  in  brief  detail,  the  symptoms  which are  called  Arishta  (fatal  indications).
The  man,  who  hears  a  variety  of  divine  sounds even  in  tlie  absence  of  any  of  the  celestial  beings, (such  as,  the  Siddhas,  the  Gandharvas  etc.),  or  thinks that  he  is  hearing  the  uproar  of  a  city,  or  the moanings  of  the  sea,  or  the  rumbling  of  a  rain cloud,  without  their  actual  presence  or  proximity,  or who  is  incapable  of  catching  their  sounds  even  when they  are  actually  present  and  sounding,  or  assigns  to them  causes  other  than  the  actual  ones,  should  be regarded  as  a  doomed  being.  The  person,  who  interprets the  uproar  of  a  city  or  the  rustling  forest  as  sounds emanating  from  other  sources,  or  rejoices  at  the  voice of  his  enemies,  and  is  annoyed  at  that  of  his  own devoted   friends,    or   who   suddenly   loses    the    faculty
Chap.  XXX.  J  SUTRASTHANAM.  285
of  hearing   without   any   manifest  or  tangible   reason, should  be  deemed  as  already  on  the  threshold  of  death.
The  man,  who  feels  cold  when  touching  a  hot or  warm  substance,  and,  vice  versa,  complains  of a  burning  sensation  even  when  suffering  from  a  boil, or  a  postule  of  the  Kaphaja  type  (characterised  by numbness,  shivering,  etc,  or  shivers  when  the  tem- perature of  his  body  is  felt  to  be  considerably  high, should  be  looked  upon  as  already  on  the  point  of death.  The  person,  who  has  lost  the  faculty  of  touch, and  does  not  feel  any  pain  in  any  part  of  the  body when  it  is  struck  or  amputated,  or  feels  as  if  his body  had  been  strewn  over  with  particles  of  dust, or  suffers  from  discoloration  of  the  skin  which  becomes marked  with  blue  or  red  stripes,  and  who  is  harassed by  hosts  of  blue  flies  after  a  bath  or  an  anointment, should  be  regarded  as  one  who  has  already  passed  the confines  of  life.
Similarly,  the  man  whose  body  emits  a  fragrant  smell without  having  been  rubbed  with  any  kind  of  perfume, or  to  whom  a  sweet  thing  tastes  acid,  and  an  acid  tastes sweet,  or  who  exhibits  symptoms  of  a  general  per- version of  the  faculty  of  taste,  or  in  whom  (articles of)  different  tastes  (administered  in  their  officinal order  of  enumeration')  tend  to  aggravate  the  deranged bodily  humours,  or  bring  about  their  pacification  and a  dulness   of  appetite  if  partaken  of  in  the  inverted
286  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  XXX.
order,   should   be   regarded   as   a   departed    soul,    like the  one  who  has  lost  the  faculty  of  taste.
The  man,  who  deems  a  fetid  odour  to  be  a  fragrant perfume,  or  one  fragi'ant  to  be  fetid,  or  one  who  does not  feel  any  discomfort  even  at  the  smell  of  a  burning lamp  wick  that  has  just  been  extinguished,  or  who  has entirely  lost  the  faculty  of  smell,  should  be  looked upon  as  a  dead  man.
The  man,  to  whom  the  twin  attributes  of  heat  and cold,  pleasure  and  pain,  as  well  as  the  peculiarities  of weather  (as  storm,  drought,  snowfall,  etc.),  and  the different  quarters  of  the  sky  appear  to  be  reversed  or inverted  ;  one  who  has  lost  all  distinctions  (of  joy  and misery,  storm  and  sunshine,  heat  and  cold,  etc.),  or  to whom  the  specific  attributes  of  things  appear  to  be contrary  and  reversed,  should  be  regarded  as  on  the point  of  death.  The  man,  who  sees  stars  ablaze  in  the broad  day-light  or  fancies  seeing  the  fiery  orb  of the  sun  by  night  an.d  the  mellow  disc  of  the  moon by  day,  or  who  seems  to  witness  the  phenomena  of rainbow  and  lightning  even  in  the  absence  of  any rain  cloud,  or  the  formation  of  a  lightning-spangled rain-cloud  even  in  a  clear  blue  sky,  is  sure  to  be speedily  gathered  to  his  rest.  The  man,  who  observes the  reflected  images  of  chariots,  palaces  and  aerial cars  in  the  heavens,  or  sees  the  embodied  images  of the   fire   and    sky     gods,     or    to     whom     the     earth
Chap.  XXX.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  287
appears  to  be  enveloped  in  frost  or  smoke,  or enshrouded  in  a  sheet  of  fine  linen,  or  chequered with  cross  lines,  or  blazing  with  fire,  or  flooded  with water,  or  to  whose  sight  the  Pole  Star  and  the  asterism Arundhati  (one  of  the  Pliades)  and  the  Milky  Way remain  invisible,  should  be  reckoned  as  already  with the  dead.
The  man,  who  foils  to  see  his  own  image  reflected in  a  mirror,  in  the  moonlight,  or  in  hot  water,  or  sees but  distorted  reflections  of  himself  or  of  any  other animal,  or  of  dogs,  cows,  storks,  vultures,  ghosts, Yakshas,  Rakshas,  Pishachas  and  Nagas,  should  be regarded  as  about  to  depart  this  life.  The  man,  to whom  fire  appears  to  be  free  of  its  natural  accom paniment  of  smoke,  or  that  it  is  possessed  of  a  colour resembling  the  hue  of  the  breast  feathers  of  a peacock,  should  be  regarded  as  doomed,  (if  happening to  be  suffering  from  any  disease).  On  the  other  hand, these  phenomena  indicate  the  approach  of  a  disease in  one,  who  is  found  to  be  as  yet  in  the  enjoyment of  apparent  health.
Thus  ends  the  thirtieth  Chapter  of  the  Sulrasthdnam  in  the  Sushriita Samhitd  which  deals  with  prognosis  from  the  perverted  functions  of  the live  sense  ortrans.
CHAPTER    XXX  I.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which deals  with  the  prognosis  to  be  gathered  from  the altered  condition  of  features  (Chhd'yar-Viprati- patti  madhy^yam).*
IVIetrical  Text: — The  man,  whose  complexion suddenly  assumes  a  brown,  red,  blue  or  yellow  shade, should  be  regarded  as  already  gathered  to  his  rest.  The man,  who  has  lost  all  sense  of  modesty  or  propriety, and  whose  complexion,  and  whose  strength  (ojah)  and memory  have  suddenly  undergone  discolouration  or extreme  deterioration,  should  be  counted  with  the  dead. Little  chance  there  is  of  the  life  of  a  patient  whose lower  lip  hangs  down  while  the  upper  one  is  drawn  or turned  up,  and  both  of  them  have  assumed  a  black colour  like  that  of  a  jamboline  fruit.  The  patient, whose   teeth   fall   out  or  which  have  assumed  a  reddish
*  Physicians  of  the  Ayurvedic  School,  however,  observe  a  dislinclion between  Chhiyd  (shade  of  complexion),  PrabhA  (healthful  glow  of  the complexion),  and  Varna  (natural  colour  of  the  complexion)  itself.  The Chh%d  or  the  shade  of  one's  complexion  may  be  easily  distinguished as  clear,  rough  or  cool,  etc.  and  can  be  detected  only  on  a  close  view. The  Prabhd,  on  the  other  hand,  is  visible  from  a  distance  and  admits  of of  being  divided  into  seven  different  types,  such  as  red,  yellow,  while, brown,  greenish,  pale,  and  black.  The  Varna  or  the  natural  colour  of the  complexion  of  a  man  is  found  to  be  either  fair,  black,  dusky  leaning towards  the  fair,  according  to  his  race  and  habitation.  The  term  also includes  natural  modestv,  look  and  ease.
Chap.  XXXI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  289
or  a  dark  brown  colour,  or  a  colour  like  that  of  a Khanjana  bird  (dark  blue),  should  be  reckoned  as  already- gathered  to  his  fathers.
The  patient,  whose  tongue  has  become  furred, swollen,  or  inert,  or  is  of  a  black  colour,  should  be considered  as  already  at  the  gate  of  death.  The  patient, whose  nose  has  sunk  or  become  bent,  cracked,  dried, or  who  when  breathing  makes  a  gurgling  sound  through the  nostrils,  should  be  given  up  as  lost.  A  patient is  certainly  quitting  this  life  whose  eyes  appear  to  be contracted,  or  unequal,  oblique,  or  inert,  insensitive  to light  or  touch,  sunk  in  their  sockets,  or  bloody,  or marked  by  a  copious  lachrymation.  The  patient  whose hair  appears  to  have  been  glued  to  his  head  whose eyebrows  are  contracted  and  hang  down,  and  whose eyelashes  are  listless  should  be  considered  as  about  to leave  his  mortal  frame.
The  patient,  who  is  incapable  of  swallowing  any  food or  of  holding  up  his  head,  and  who  looks  with  a  kind  of fixed  stare,  with  all  memories  of  life  fully  obliterated, should  be  deemed  as  d3'ing  on  that  very  day.  A  wise or  prudent  physician  should  give  up  the  medical treatment  of  a  patient,  no  matter  whether  strong or  weak,  who  is  found  to  be  fainting  away  every time  he  is  lifted  up  or  seated.  The  patient,  who constantly-  extends  or  draws  up  his  lower  extremities, or  keeps  them    in   a  gathered  up  posture,  should  be
37
290  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XXXI.
looked  upon  as  rapidly  succumbing.  A  wise  physician should  abandon  a  patient,  characterised  by  the  cold- ness of  his  breath  and  extremities  and  a  hurried  and intermittent  respiration,  or  who  is  found  breathing  with his  mouth  open,  or  lips  separated.
Similarly,  a  patient  affected  with  a  kind  of  stupor or  insomnia  and  remaining  drowsy,  all  day  long,  or fainting  at  the  least  attempt  of  speaking,  should  be counted  with  the  dead.  The  patient,  who  licks  his  upper lip,  or  is  troubled  with  eructations,  or  holds  conversa- tions with  the  departed,  should  be  deemed  as  already entered  into  the  region  of  the  dead.  A  man,  spontane- ously bleeding  through  the  roots  of  his  hairs  (pores  of  the skin)  otherwise  than  in  a  case  of  poisoning,  should  be deemed  as  dying  on  that  day.
A  patient,  affected  with  an  up-coursing  pain  about the  cardiac  region,  like  the  one  which  distinguishes  a case  of  V^tashtila  (^appearance  of  a  stone-like  lump rising  or  seated  within  the  thorax  and  ascribed  to  the action  of  the  deranged  Vayu),  accompanied  by  an aversion  to  food,  etc.,  should  be  already  reckoned  among the  dead.
An  idiopathic  swelling  (Shopha)  first  occurring  in either  of  the  lower  extremities  in  a  male  patient  not  as  a complication  of  an}'  other  disease*,  as  well  as  a  similar swelling  first  appearing  at  the  face,  or  about  the   region
*     Such  as  Chlorosis,  Ascites,  lioemorrhoids.
Chap.  XXXI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  291
of  the  anus   in   a   male   or  a  female  patient,  is  sure  to have  a  fatal  termination.     •
A  patient,  suffering  ■  from  cough  or  asthma attended  with  dysentery,  fever,  hic-cough,  vomiting and  swelling  of  the  penis  and  the  scrotum,  should be  given  up  as  lost.  Excessive  perspiration,  burning, hic-cough,  dyspnoea  and  hyperpyrexia  with  a  burning sensation  of  the  body,  are  undoubtedl)'  capable  of extinguishing  the  vital  spark  even  in  a  strong  patient. Similarl}^  a  patient,  with  a  black  coated  tongue  and  the left  eye  sunk  in  its  socket  and  a  foul  smell  from  the mouth,  should  be  given  up  as  lost.
The  mouth  of  a  man,  who  is  on  his  way  to  the mansions  of  the  god  of  death,  becomes  filled  v^ith  tears, the  legs  are  wet  with  perspiration,  and  the  pupils of  the  eyes  roll  about  or  become  listless.
The  patient,  whose  limbs  become  all  of  a  sudden abnormally  light  or  heavy,  is  sure  to  go  to  the  region  of the  son  of  the  da5''-god  (Yama.i  The  patient,  whose body  emits  a  fishy,  dirty  or  a  fragrant  smell,  or  smells like  fat,  oil,  or  clarified-butter,  is  on  the  way  to  the mansions  of  Death.
The  patient  on  whose  forehead  lice  freely  move about,  or  whose  offerings  the  crows  do  not  eat,  or  who does  not  find  comfort  in  any  position  or  place,  goes  to the  mansions  of  the  god  of  death.    A  patient,  who  has
2g2  ''^HE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA',      [Chap.  xxxi.
become  emaciated  and  enfeebled,  or  has  been  suffering from  a  complication  of  such  diseases  as  fever,  dysentery, oedema,  etc.,  one  supervening  another  pre-existing malady,  should  be  deemed  as  beyond  the  pale of  medicine.  A  ravenous  hunger  or  an  unquench- able thirst  in  a  weak  patient,  who  refuses to  be  appeased  or  satisfied  with  sweet,  whole- some and  ]ialatable  food  or  drink,  should  be  re- garded as  a  fatal  indication.  A  patient  exhibiting such  symptoms  as  diarrhoea,  an  excruciating  headache, colic  in  the  intestines,  thirst  and  gradual  faihng  of strength,  stands  in  danger  of  imminent  death. Death  is  due  to  the  transitory  character  of  life, or  it  may  be  attributed  to  irregular  conduct,  or to  the  deeds  of  one's  previous  existence  transformed into  the  dynamics  of  fate.
Ghosts,  evil  spirits,  Pishachas  and  monsters  of various  shapes  and  denomination,  constanth^  lead  men to  death.  These  evil  spirits,  owing  to  their  natural killing  propensities,  nullify  the  efficacies  of  medicines ; and  hence  it  is  futile  to  take  in  hand  the  medical  treat- ment of  a  man  who  exhibits  any  of  the  abovesaid  fatal symptoms,  and  thereby  testifies  that  lie  has  fallen  into the  clutches  of  such  evil  spirits.
Thus  ends  the  Thirty-first  Chapter  of  the  SutrasthSnam  in  the  Sushruta- SamhitA  which  deals  with  prognosis  from  perverted  features.
CHAPTER    XXXII. Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  treats of  the  prognosis  based  on  the  perversion  of  the  external appearances   of   the  body    (Svabha'va-viprati- patti  -  madhyaryam) .
A  contrariety  of  the  natural  features  of  any  part  or member  of  the  body  should  be  looked  upon  as  a  fatal indication.  The  blackness  of  a  limb  or  a  part  which is  naturally  white,*  or  the  whiteness  of  a  blackf  part, or  a  naturally  red|  part,  or  member,  etc.  assuming  any other  colour,  or  a  hard§  part  becoming  soft,  and vice  versaW,  or  a  movableU  part  suddenly  becoming fixed,  and  vice  versa**  or  the  contraction  (flexion)  of  an extended  part,  or  the  extension  or  expansion  of  a contracted  (flexible;  part,  or  a  shorttt  part  suddenly becoming  elongatedji,  and  vice  versa,  or  a  sudden hanging  down  of  a  part  or  member  of  the  body  which does  not  naturally §§  hang  down,  and  vice  versa\\\\, or  a  sudden  increase  or  decrease  of  natural  temperature of  any  part,  member,  or  organ  of  the  body,  as  well as  its  sudden  glossiness,  roughness,  numbness,  discolour- ation, weakness,  or  weariness,  should  be  looked  upon  as fatal  symptoms.
*  The  teeth  and  the  cornea,  f  The  iris,  J  The  tongue  and  the palate,  etc.  §  Bones,  teeth,  etc.  |i  Soft  parts  such  as  the  flesh,  fat,  etc. H  Joints,  etc.  **  Nose,  ears  and  flesh,  etc.  ft  Head  and  forehead,  etc. XX  Pupils,  etc.     §§  Hair,  nails,  etc.     |i||  Perspiration,  urine  and  feces,  etc.
294
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  XXXII.
(Similarly)  a  limb  or  a  part  of  the  body,  hanging down  from  its  natural  position,  or  becoming  raised  or twisted  round,  or  cast  obliquely  from  its  natural  seat,  or dislocated,  or  protruded,  or  drawn  inward,  or  suddenly becoming  light  or  heavy  without  any  definite  or assignable  cause,  or  a  sudden  eruption  of  a  coral- coloured  rash  or  Vyanga,  should  be  regarded  as  indicat- ing a  speedy  dissolution  of  the  patient  in  whom  they are  exhibited.
Likewise,  the  appearance  of  veins  in  the  region  of the  forehead,  or  an  eruption  of  postules  on  the  ridge  of the  nose,  perspiration  on  the  forehead  in  the  morning, copious  lachrymation  without  any  ocular  complaint, a  sense  of  being  dusted  with  dried  and  pulverised cowdung  over  the  face,  or  the  flying  of  pigeons,  Kankas, etc,  over  one's  head,  or  excessive  micturitions  or motions  of  the  bowels  from  an  empty  stomach,  or  a suppression  of  urine  or  feces  even  after  a  hearty  meal or  draught,  is  fatal.  So  also,  pain  and  aching  about  the breast  and  the  chest,  emaciation  of  the  extremities and  an  oedema  of  the  middle  part  of  the  trunk,  and vice  versa  ;  or  an  oedema  of  the  upper  trunk  and emaciation  of  the  lower  part,  and  vice  versa  ;  or  an oedema  of  the  left  half  of  the  body  and  emaciation of  the  right,  and  vice  versa  ;  or  hoarseness,  huskiness,  or loss  of  voice,  discolouring  of  the  teeth,  nails  or  of  the skin,  eruption  of  white  patches  on  the  chest,  etc,  of  the
Chap.  XXXII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  295
body,  should  be  deemed   as   signs  which   forebode   the approaching  dissolution  of  an  individual.
Moreover  the  patient,  whose  semen,  or  expectorated or  fecal  matter  does  not  float  on  water,  or  who  sees  the distorted  or  bifurcated  images  of  objects,  or  whose  hair shines  with  a  gloss  as  if  anointed  with  oil,  finds  his relief  in  death.  A  weak  dysentery  patient  with a  complete  aversion  to  food,  or  one  who  is tormented  with  thirst  even  when  suffering  from a  cough,  or  a  man  suffering  from  chronic  catarrh with  a  complete  loathing  for  food,  or  from gastritis  ^Sula)  with  aphonia,  and  vomiting  frothy blood  and  pus,  should  be  regarded  as  past  all  cure.  A patient,  enfeebled  and  emaciated  through  fever,  cough and  an  oedematous  swelling  of  the  face  and  the  extre- mities, and  showing  the  greatest  aversion  to  food, and  the  muscles  of  whose  calves,  shoulders  and  thighs have  grown  loose  and  flabby,  should  be  considered  as awaiting  the  call  of  death.
A  patient,  suffering  from  fever,  cough,  and  vomiting, or  passing  with  the  stool,  in  the  evening,  undigested food  matter  eaten  in  the  morning,  would  die  of  asthma. The  patient,  who  falls  to  the  ground  bleating  hke  a goat,  and  exhibits  such  symptoms  as  a  rupture  of  the testes,  numbness  of  the  penis,  drooping  of  the  neck and  introsusception  of  the  penis,  should  be  considered as  past  all  cure.     The  patient,  whose  heart   is   first  felt
296  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XXXII.
dry  followed  by  becoming  covered  with  a  slimy moisture  of  the  whole  body,  as  well  as  one  who  strikes a  stone  with  a  stone,  or  a  piece  of  wood  with  a piece  of  wood,  or  who  cleaves  in  two  blades  of dried  grass,  or  one  who  bites  his  lower  lip  and  licks  the upper  one,  or  draws  his  ears  and  tears  his  hair,  or  dis- honours the  gods  and  the  Brahmanas,  as  well  as  his own  physician,  friends  and  relations,  should  be  regarded as  beyond  the  pale  of  medicine.
Similarl}',  a  disease,  due  to  the  influence  of  a  malig- nant planet  occupying,  either  through  its  retrogade  or zigzag  movement,  an  inauspicious  position  in  relation  to the  natal  asterism  of  the  patients,  is  sure  to  terminate in  death.  A  man,  struck  by  lightning  or  a  falling  meteor, baffles  all  medicinal  skill.  Similarly,  a  disease  due  to the  fact  of  one's  own  house,  wife,  bed,  seat,  con- veyance, or  riding-animal  assuming  any  ill-omened features,  or  a  disease  originated  through  the  use  of  gems, utensils,   garments,   etc.    of    forbidden   or   inauspicious
character  usuall}^  ends  in  death  (Aristam).
« Authoritative  verses  on  the  Sub- ject : — A  disease,  appearing  in  an  enfeebled  and emaciated  subject  and  refusing  to  yield  to  a  course  of proper  medicinal  treatment,  and  which  becomes  rather aggravated  by  the  administraticn  of  proper  medicinal remedies  or  antidotes,  necessarily  portends  the  death  of the  patient.
Chap.  XXXII.    ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  297
A  Mahavyadhi*  (lit : — a  deep  seated  disease)  sud- denly abating  in  a  person  in  whom  nourishment fails  to  produce  any  perceptible  effect  forebodes  a  fatal termination.  The  ph3'sician,  who  can  detect  and  full}^ interpret  these  fatal  indications,  is  honoured  by  the  king for  determining  the  curable  or  incurable  nature  of  a disease.
*  Any  deep  seated  disease,  which  seriously  affects  the  vital  principles of  a  man,  is  called  MahAvj-^dhi.  Diseases  such  as  Prameha,  V^tavyadhi, Shosha,  etc.  have  also  been  included  within  the  category  in  the  Chapter  on ICciya-chikitsh^.  A  general  amelioration  or  recovery  in  these  cases  being natural,  on  account  of  their  deep-seated  character,  a  sudden  abatement is  usually  fraught  with  fatal    consequences.     (Arishtattl.)
Thus  ends  the  thirty-second  Chapter  of  Sutrasthanam  in  the  Sushrula- S^mhita  which  deals  with  the  prognosis  based  on  perversion  of  the natural  appearances  of  the  body.
38
CHAPTER     XXXII  I.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which  treats  of incurable  diseases  (A'varaniya-madhyayam).
IVIetrical  texts  :— Hear  me  describe,  Oh  child, the  diseases  which  being  attended  with  many  a distressing  and  supervenient  symptom,  and  being treated  without  rejuvenating  and  restorative  medicines, speedily  assume  incurable  character.  The  following eight  diseases,  viz  : — Maha-Vata-vyadhi  (paralysis or  diseases  affecting  the  nervous  system  in  general), Prameha  morbid  discharges  from  the  urethra) ,  Kushtha, Arsha  (piles),  Vagandara  fistula  in  ano\  Ashmari (stone  in  the  bladder),  Mudha-garbha  (false  presen- tations) and  the  eight  kinds  of  Udari  (abdominal  drops)'-) are,  by  their  very  nature,  extremely  hard  to  cure.  A  phy- sician with  any  regard  to  professional  success  should  aban- don a  patient  laid  up  with  any  of  the  preceding  diseases, marked  by  complications  such  as,  emaciation  of  the body,  loss  of  strength,  dyspnoea,  palpitation,  wasting, vomiting,  dysentery  and  hie- cough,  fever  and  swoon. A  case  of  Vatavyadhi  developing  symptoms,  such  as oedematous  swelling,  complete  anesthesia  of  the  affected part,  breaking  and  palsy  shaking)  of  the  affected  limbs, distention  of  the  abdomen,  with  aching  and  colic  pain, usually  ends  in  death.
Chap.  XXXIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
299
A  case  of  Prameha,  attended  with  indications as  are  to  be  found  under  the  head  of  that  disease, as  well  as  an  increased  secretion  of  urine  charged with  semen,  albumen,  etc.  and  eruptions  of  specific abcesses  (.known  as  Sharavika  etc.)  is  sure  to  have a  fatal  termination.
A  case  of  Kushtha  (leprosy)  characterised  by  sponta- neous bursting  of  the  affected  parts,  hoarse  voice, and  blood-shot  eyes,  and  not  proving  itself  amen- able to  the  five-fold  appliances  of  emetics,  purga- tives, etc.  (Pancha-Karma),  usuall)^  ends  in  death. A  case  of  piles  attended  with  thirst,  aversion  to  food, colic  pain,  excessive  haemorrhage,  anasarca  (Shopha) of  the  locality,  and  dysenter}''  is  soon  relieved  by death.
A  patient  suffering  from  an  attack  of  fistula  in ano,  characterised  by  an  emission  of  flatus  (Vayu), urine,  fecal  matter,  worms  and  semen  through  the ulcerated  locality,  should  be  given  up  as  lost.  A patient  suffering  from  the  presence  of  stone,  gravel,  or urinary  concretions  (Sharkar^)  in  the  bladder  and attended  with  oedema  of  the  scrotum  and  the  umbilicus, retention  of  urine,  and  colic  pain  in  that  organ,  is soon  relieved  of  his  pain  by  death.
In  a  case  of  false  presentation  ^Mudhagarva)  an extreme   constriction  of   the     mouth     of    the    uterus
300  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     f  Chap.  XXXIII.
(os  uteri),  development  of  the  peculiar  pain  of  child- birth, which  is  known  as  Makkalla,  tonic  rigidity  of the  vagina,  and  situation  of  the  placenta  (Apara)  at  a wrong  place  (false  pregnancy;  and  other  symptoms  (con- vulsions, cough,  d3^spnoea,  vertigo  etc/i  described  in  the Chapter  on  the  Etiology  of  that  disease,  forebode  the death  of  the  parturient  woman.
A  patient  suffering  from  abdominal  dropsy  (ascites) marked  by  pain  at  the  sides,  aversion  to  food,  oede- matous  swelling  of  the  limbs,  dysentery  and  fresh accumulation  of  water  even  after  he  had  been  tapped, or  evacuated  with  the  exhibition  of  purgatives,  should be  given  up  as  incurable.  A  case  of  fever  in  which the  patient  becomes  restless  and  tosses  about  in  the bed  in  an  unconscious  state,  and  lies  extremely  pros- trate, or  is  incapable  of  sitting  or  of  holding  himself  up in  any  other  position  and  is  besides  afllicted  with  rigor though  complaining  of  a  burning  sensation  within, is  sure  to  end  in  death.
Similarly,  a  fever  patient  developing  such  symptoms as,  the  appearance  of  goose  flesh  on  the  skin,  an  aching gathered-up  pain  in  the  cardiac  region,  blood-shot or  congested  eyes,  and  breathing  through  the  mouth should  be  deemed  as  already  at  the  threshold  of death.  Similarly,  a  case  of  fever,  attended  with  hic-cough, dyspnoea,  thirst,  fits  of  unconsciousness  or  fainting,  and rolling   of  the   eye-balls,  proves   fatal   in   a  weak   and
Chap.  XXXIII.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  301
emaciated  patient,  who  is  found   to   breathe  hurriedly through  the  mouth.
A  case  of  fever  proves  fatal  in  a  patient,  found to  be  restless  or  to  lie  inert  in  an  unconscious (subcomatose)  state  with  dull,  clouded,  or  tearful  eyes, or  prostrate,  somnolent  and  extremely  emaciated.  A fever  patient  and  especially  an  old  one  extremely enfeebled  and  emaciated,  readily  succumbs  to  an attack  of  dysentery  in  which  laboured  respiration, colic  and  thirst  supervene.
An  attack  of  Phthisis  (Yakshm^)  leads  its  victim to  death  in  whom  glossiness  of  the  e3'es,  aversion to  food,  expiratory  (subclavicle)  dyspnoea,  difficult  and up-drawn  breathing  (Urdha-Shvasa),  and  painful  and and  excessive  micturition  (diarrhoea  according  to  others), manifest  themselves,  A  patient  suffering  from  an attack  of  Gulma  (abdominal  gland),  and  on  the  verge of  death,  exhibits  such  symptoms  as  laboured  and  painful respiration,  colic  pain,  unquenchable  thirst,  aversion to  food,  loss  of  consciousness,  anaemia,  and  the  sudden obliteration  of  the  Granthi  (tumorous  or  glandular formation).
A  person  laid  up  with  an  attack  of  Vidradhi  (abscess) and  exhibiting  such  fatal  symptoms  as  distension of  the  abdomen,  retention  of  urine,  vomiting,  hic- cough, thirst,  pain  of  a  varied  character  (such  as  aching, excruciating,  etc.)   and   dyspnoea,   should   be   regarded
302  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap,  XXXIII.
as  to  have  approached  the  goal  of  his  life.  A  patient suffering  from  an  attack  •  of  jaundice  or  chlorosis marked  by  yellowness  of  the  teeth,  nails,  and  of  the conjunctivae,  and  seeing  everything  yellow,  is  not expected  to  long  survive  the  occurrence  of  the  attack.
A  person  laid  up  with  an  attack  of  Haemoptysis, largely  vomiting  blood,  and  viewing  everything  red  or blood-coloured  with  his  blood-shot  eyes,  should  be regarded  as  about  to  depart  this  life.  A  person,  insane, extremely  enfeebled  and  emaciated,  and  sitting  up  sleep- less in  the  night,  or  with  eyes  constantly  lifted  upward or  cast  down,  would  be  soon  relieved  of  his  earthly suffering.  A  case  of  Apasm^ra  (epilepsy)  proves  fatal in  a  person,  who  is  extremely  emaciated,  and  whose eye-brows  are  constantly  moving  and  whose  eyes  seem fixed  in  an  unnatural  (oblique)  stare.
Thus   ends   the   the    thirty-third    Chapter    of  the    Sutrasthinam    in  the Sushruta  Samhita  which  treats  of  incurable  diseases.
CHAPTER    XXXIV.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  treats of  the  mode  of  preserving  the  life  of  a  king  whose soldiers  are  on  march  (J  ucta-Scniya-madhy^- yam).
Metrical  Texts  :— I  shall  presentl}^  describe the  measures,  which  a  physician  in  the  king's  service should  adopt  with  a  view  to  protect  the  life  of  his  royal master,  specially  from  acts  of  secret  poisoning,  while mobilizing  his  armies  to  invade  the  territor}^  of  a neighbouring  monarch  accompanied  by  his  chiefs  and ministers.
A  common  practice  of  the  enemy  under  such circumstances  is  to  poison  the  wells  on  the  roadside,  the articles  of  food,  the  shades  of  trees  (shadowy  places)  and the  fuel  and  forage  for  cattle  ;  hence  it  is  incumbent on  a  physician  marching  with  the  troops,  to  inspect, examine  and  purify  these  before  using  any  of  them, in  case  they  be  poisoned.  The  symptoms  and  medical treatment  will  be  fully  described  and  discussed  later  on in  the  part,  entitled  the  Kalpa  Sthanam.
Men,  learned  in  the  lore  of  the  Atharva  Veda,  hold that  death  may  be  attributed  to  a  hundred  and  one different  causes,  (lit  :  deaths  of  a  hundred  and  one kinds)  of  which   one   (which  is  that  of   an  old  man
304
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.    [Chap.  XXXIV.
natural!}'-  and  spontaneously  expiring)  is  called  natural, while  the  rest  are  unnatural  or  traumatic  in  their origin.  Physicians  conversant  with  the  curative  virtues of  drugs  and  minerals,  and  priests  well  versed  in  the Vedic  Mantras,  should  jointly  protect  the  king  from death,  whether  due  to  idiopathic  (Doshajai  or extrinsic  causes.
The  god  Brahma  disclosed  to  the  world  the  Atharva Veda  together  with  the  eight  allied  branches  of Vedic  hterature  and  the  science  of  medicine.  And since  a  priest  (Brahmana)  is  well- versed  in  the  aforesaid branches  of  study,  a  physician  should  act  subserviently and  occupy  a  subordinate  position  to  the  priest.  The death  of  a  king  usually  leads  to  a  political  revolu- tion or  to  popular  disturbances  and  brings  about  a confusion  among  the  vocations  of  the  different  orders of  society.  The  growth  of  population  markedly suffers  through  such  catastrophies.
As  the  external  features  of  a  king  resemble  those  of  a common  person,  while  his  (king's)  commanding  majesty, sacrifice,  forbearance  and  fortune  are  super- human (in  their  nature  and  intensity),  therefore  a  man  should, who  is  prudent  and  seeks  his  own  good,  think reverentially  of  his  king,  and  propitiate  him  with tokens  of  loyalty  and  allegiance  as  if  he  were  a  deity. A  physician,  fully  equipped  with  a  supply  of  medicine, should  live    in   a   camp   not  remote   from  the    royal
Chap.  XXXIV.  ]  SUTRASTKANAM.  365
pavilion,  and  there  the  persons  wounded  by  shafts  ot arrows  or  an}^  other  war  projectiles,  or  suffering from  the  effects  of  any  imbibed  poison,  should resort  to  him  (the  physician),  conspicuous  like  a  tri- umphant ensign  for  his  fame  and  professional  success. A  physician,  well  versed  in  his  own  technical  science, and  commanding  a  fair  knowledge  of  other  allied branches  of  study  as  well,  is  glorified  by  his  king and  the  Brahmanas,  and  is  like  a  banner  of  victory  an ennobling  ornament  to  the  state.
The  physician,  the  patient,  the  medicine,  and  the attendants  (nurses  are  the  four  essential  factors  of  a course  of  medical  treatment.  Even  a  dangerous  disease is  readily  cured,  or  it  may  be  expected  to  run  a  speedy course  in  the  event  of  the  preceding  four  factors  being respectively  found  to  be  (qualified,  self-controlled, genuine  and  intelligently  watchful  .
In  the  absence  of  a  qualified  physician  the  three remaining  factors  of  treatment  will  prove  abortive  like  a religious  sacrifice  performed  with  the  help  of  an Udgatri,*  a  Hotri,t  and  a  Brahmana,  in  the  absence  of an  Adhvaryam.t  A  qualified  physician  is  alone  capable ofreheving  the  pain  of  many  a  suffering  patient,  just   as
"'  Udgdtri  ;  —One  of  the  four  piiucipal  priests  al  a  sacrifice,  who  chants llie  hymns  of  the  Sdma  Veda.
t  Hotri — A  priest,  who  recites  the  (Riks)  pr.iyers  of  the  Rik  \'eda  at  a religious  sacrifice.
t  Adhvaryyu  — A  priest  of  the  ^'ayur  \'eda,  whose  duly  is  to  cast  the sacrificial  beast  into  the  fire.
39
3o6  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap,  xxxiv.
only  a  helmsman  is  capable  of  taking  his  boat  across  a river  even  without  the  help  <ind  co-operation  of  a  single oarsman.
Qualities  of  a  physician  :— A  physician, who  is  well  versed  in  the  science  of  medicine  and  has attended  to  the  demonstrations  of  surgery  and  medicine, and  who  himself  practises  the  healing  art,  and  is  clean, courageous,  light-handed,  fully  equipped  with  supplies of  medicine,  surgical  instruments  and  appliances, and  who  is  intelligent,  well  read,  and  is  a  man  of  ready resources,  and  one  commands  a  decent  practice,  and  is further  endowed  with  all  moral  virtues,  is  alone  fit  to be  called  a  physician.
Patient  : — The  patient,  who  believes  in  a  kind and  all-merciful  Providence,  and  possesses  an  unshakable fortitude  and  strong  vital  energy,  and  who  is  laid  up with  a  curable  form  of  disease,  and  is  not  greedy,  and who  further  commands  all  the  necessary  articles  at  his disposal,  and  firmly  adheres  to  the  advice  of  his physician,  is  a  patient  of  the  proper  or  commendable type.
lYIedicine  : — The  proper;  medicine  is  that  which consists  of  drugs  grown  in  countries  most  congenial  to their  growth,  collected  under  the  auspices  of  proper lunar  phases  and  asterisms,  and  compounded  in  proper measures  and  proportions,  and  which  is  pleasing (exhilarating   to   the   mind    and   has    the   property   of
Chap.  XXXIV.]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
307
subduing  the  deranged  bodily  humours  without  creating any  discomfort  to  the  patient,  and  which  is  harmless eveil  in  an  overdose,  and  is  judiciously  administered  at the  opportune  moment.
Nurse  : — That  person  alone  is  fit  to  nurse  or  to attend  the  bedside  of  a  patient,  who  is  cool-headed and  pleasant  in  his  demeanour,  does  not  speak  ill  of any  body,  is  strong  and  attentive  to  the  requirements of  the  sick,  and  strictly  and  indefatigably  follows  the instructions  of  the  physician.
Thus  ends  the  ihirly-fourth  Chapter  of  the  SiitrasthSnam  in  the Sushruia  Samhit^,  which  treats  of  preserving  the  life  of  a  king  whose soldiers  are  on  march.
l!
CHAPTER    XXXV
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  deals with  clinical  observations  (A'turopakramaniya- madhyaryam).
A  physician  should  first  observe  the  vital  condition (Ayu)  of  the  patient  before  commencing  the  medical treatment.  After  that,  the  nature  of  the  disease,  the country  and  season  of  the  year  in  which  it  has  made  its appearance,  as  well  as  the  state  of  digestion,  age,  body, strength,  disposition,  habit,  previous  medicine,  natural temperament  and  the  power  of  endurance  of  the patient,  etc.  should  be  observed  and  carefully  examined.
Characteristic  features  of  a  long lived  man  : — Men,  the  dimensions  of  whose hands,  legs,  sides,  back,  nipples  of  the  breast,  teeth, face,  shoulders  and  forehead  exceed  the  average,  as well  as  those  whose  eyes,  arms,  phalanges  and  fingers are  longer  than  the  ordinary  ones  should  be  regarded  as going  to  live  long.  Those  who  have  broad  chests, broad  eye-brows  with  broader  spaces  intervening  between the  muscles  of  the  breasts,  and  who  take  in  deeper inspirations  of  breath,  will  be  long  lived.  Those  whose necks,  thighs,  and  generative  organs  are  shorter  than those  of  the  average  type,  or  those  whose  voices  and umbilical  cavities  -are  deep,  and  whose  breasts  are  unraised an  d  thick-set,  and  external  ears  broad,  fleshy  and  haiiy.
Chap.  XXXV.  j  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  309
with  the  occipital  region  fully  developed  and  protruded, will  enjoy  a  longer  span  of' life.  Men,  on  whose  bodies sandal  paste  and  similar  preparations  begin  to  dry up  from  the  head  downward,  while  those  applied  over the  chest  become  absorbed  later,  should  be  looked  upon as  persons  endowed  with  an  uncommonly  longer  dura- tion of  life.
The  medical  treatment  of  such  a  patient  may  be unhesitatingly  taken  in  hand  by  a  physician.  Persons, exhibiting  bodily  features  other  than  those  described above,  should  be  looked  upon  as  short-lived  men, while  those,  who  are  possessed  of  features  common to  men  of  both  the  above  mentioned  types,  should be  considered  as  keeping  the  mean  between  them as  regards  longevity  (Madhyamayuh).
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — A  man,  with  deep-set  bones,  ligaments,  and veins,  and  tough  and  thick-set  limbs,  and  firm  and unflinching  sense  organs,  as  well  as  one  whose  body gradually  develops  a  more  and  more  symmetrical shape,  should  be  looked  upon  as  a  long-lived  man  The man,  who  has  not  ailed  for  a  single  moment  even  from the  day  of  his  birth,  and  has  been  getting  more  and more  strong- limbed  every  day  through  the  culti- vation of  his  inborn  sense  and  a  better  knowledge of  the  laws  of  health,  is  sure  to  live  to  a  good  old  age in  the  full  enjoyment  of  his  senses  and  intellect.
3IO  THE  SUSHRTTTA   SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XXXV.
IVIadhyama^uh  :— Now,  hear  me  describe the  bodily  features  of  a  man  of  a  mean  or  aver- age duration  of  life  (Madhyamayuli;.  The  man,  the integuments  of  whose  lower  eyelids  are  marked  with two  or  three  well-marked  and  extended  lines  or furrows,  and  whose  legs  and  external  ears  are  thick and  fleshy,  and  the  tip  of  whose  nose  is  turned  a little  upward,  and  who  has  up-pointed  lines  directly running  through  the  middle  of  his  back,  is  expected  to live  up  to  the  ripe  old  age  of  seventy  years.
Specific     traits     of     a    short-lived
man  : — ^Xow,  hear  me  describe  the  specific  traits, which  characterise  the  body  of  a  short-li^•ed  man. A  man  with  short  phalanges  of  fingers,  a  narrow back,  and  external  ears  abnormall}'  raised  up  from their  natural  seats,  and  who  is  possessed  of  a  large penis,  a  high  nose,  a  breast  covered  with  ringlets of  curly  hair,  and  who  exposes  the  gums  of  his teeth,  or  whose  e3'es  roll  while  talking  or  laughing, is  not  expected  to  see  more  than  twenty-five  summers.
We  shall  now  give  the  exact  measures  of  the  different limbs  and  members  of  the  body  for  the  better ascertainment  of  the  duration  of  life  of  a  patient under  investigation. — The  legs,  the  arms,  and  the head  are  called  the  limbs  of  the  bod}*-,  while  their  com- ponent parts  are  called  the  members  (Avayavas). The  great  toe  of  a  man,  or  the  one  next  to  it,  measured
Chap,  xxxv.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  311
with  his  own  fingers  should  measure  two  fingers' width  in  length,  the  lengths  of  the  other  toes  (the  third, fourth,  and  small  ones)  successively  diminishing  by a  fifth  part  of  that  of  his  middle  finger  ( Pradeshini).
The  fore-sole  and  the  sole  proper  respectively  should measure  four  fingers'  width  in  length  and  five  fingers' width  in  breadth.  The  heel  of  the  foot  (Parshni)  should measure  five  fingers'  width  in  length  and  four  fingers' wadth  in  breadth.  The  foot  itself  should  measure fourteen  fingers'  width  in  length.  The  girth  of  the  foot, as  well  as  the  circumference  of  the  middle  parts  of thighs  and  knee-joints,  respectively  should  measure fourteen  fingers  in  width.
The  part  of  the  leg  between  the  ankle  and  the knee-joint  should  measure  eighteen  fingers'  width  in length,  while  the  part  between  the  joint  of  the  waist and  the  knee-joint  should  measure  thirty -two  fingers' width  in  length,  the  entire  leg  thus  measuring  fifty fingers'  width  in  all.  The  length  of  the  thigh  is  the same  as  that  of  the  part  lying  between  the  heel  and  the knee-joint  (Jangha  .
The  scrotum,  the  chin,  the  (two  rows  of)  teeth, the  exterior  line  of  the  nostrils^  the  roots  of  the ears,  and  the  intervening  space  between  the  eyes,  should respectively  measure  two  fingers'  width  in  length.  The non-erected  penis,  the  cavity  of  the  mouth,  the  two rows    of    teeth,   the    nose,   the    height   of    the   neck.
JI2  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XXXV.
the  ears,  and  the  forehead,  and  the  space  intervenmg between  the  pupils  of  the  eyes  measure  four  fingers' width  in  length.
The  entire  length  of  the  vaginal  canal  should  measure twelve  fingers'  width.  The  space  l3nng  between  the  penis and  the  umbihcus,as  well  as  the  one  intervening  between the  chest  and  the  upper  end  of  the  throat  (lit :  neck), like  the  one  h'ing  between  the  tips  of  the  two nipples  of  the  breast,  should  measure  twelve  fingers' width  in  length.  The  length  of  the  entire  face  should measure  twelve  fingers'  width.  The  girth  round  the wrist  and  the  fore-arm  of  a  man  should  measure  twelve fingers.
The  girth  round  the  knee-joint  is  sixteen  fingers' width  and  the  length  between  the  wrist  and  the  elbow should  measure  sixteen  fingers'  width.  The  part  of  the arm  between  the  elbow  and  the  tip  of  the  middle  finger should  measure  twenty-four  fingers'  width  in  all.  The length  of  the  entire  arm  mea.sures  thirty- two  fingers' width,  and  the  girth  round  the  thighs  should  measure thirty-two  fingers'  width.  The  palm  of  the  hand  should measure  six  fingers'  width  in  length  and  four  fingers' width  in  breadth.  The  space  between  the  bottom of  the  ball  of  the  thumb  to  the  root  of  the  index finger,  as  well  as  the  space  between  the  root  of  the  ears to  the  outer  corner  or  angle  of  the  eyes,  should  measure live     fingers'    in    length.      The   middle   finger    should
Chap.  XXXV.  j  SUTRASTHANAM.  31-
measure  five  fingers'  width  in  length.  The  index  and the  ring-fingers  respectively -should  measure  four  and  a half  fingers  in  length,  the  thumbs  and  the  little  fingers respectively  measuring  three  and  a  half  fingers.
The  fissure  of  the  mouth  should  measure  four  fingers in  length.  The  girth  round  the  neck  should  measure twenty  fingers.  Each  of  the  cavities  of  the  nostrils should  measure  one  and  three  quarter  parts  of  a finger  in  length.  The  region  of  the  iris  occupies  a  third part  of  the  entire  area  of  the  cornea.  The  region  of the  pupil  should  measure  a  ninth  part  thereof
The  arch  extending  from  the  hairy  extremity  of the  templar  region  to  the  middle  point  of  the  back of  the  head  should  measure  eleven  fingers.  The  distance between  the  middle  of  the  head  and  the  terminal point  of  the  hairy  portion  of  the  neck  should  measure ten  fingers  in  length.  The  girth  of  the  neck  measured from  the  back  of  one  ear  to  that  of  the  other  should  be fourteen  fingers.  The  length  of  the  pelvic  region  of a  young  woman  measured  from  below  the  anterior side  of  the  thigh  joints  should  be  found  to  be  equal  to the  breadth  of  the  chest  (Vakshah)  in  a  male  subject 'twelve  fingers\
The  thigh  of  a  woman  should  be    eighteen  fingers  in
breadth  and  equal  to  that  of  the  waist  of  a  man.     The
entire  length  of  a  male  human  body  should  be  a  hundred
and  twenty  fingers. 40
314  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  xxxv.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject:—An  intelligent  physician  should  regard  the organism  oi"  a  man  of  twenty- five  or  of  a  woman  of sixteen  years  of  age,  as  fully  developed  in  respect  of the  maturity  of  the  seven  fundamental  principles  of  the body  such  as,  serum,  blood,  Sic).  The  dimensions of  the  different  limbs  and  members  of  the  body,  laid down  above,  should  be  understood  as  to  have  been measured  by  the  standard  of  one's  (man's  or  woman's) own  finger's  width,  and  a  person,  whose  limbs  and  organs are  found  to  correspond  to  the  above-said  measures,  is sure  to  live  to  a  good  and  hearty  old  age,  as  a necessary  and  befitting  sequel  to  a  happ3'  and  prosperous career  in  life.  In  the  case  of  a  partial  correspondence of  one's  limbs  and  organs  to  the  above-said  measures and  proportions,  a  man  should  be  regarded  as  having an  average  life  and  prosperity.  A  person  whose  limbs fall  short  of  the  abovesaid  measures  should  be  regarded as  an  indigent  and  short-lived  person.
Physical  temperament  (Sa'ra)  :— Now
we  shall  describe  the  characteristic  traits  of  the different  preponderant  principles  (Sara)  or  temperaments of  the  human  organism.  A  man,  who  is  possessed  of  a good  retentive  memory,  and  is  intelligent,  valorous  and cleanly  in  his  habits,  and  whose  mind  is  graced  with such  rare  and  excellent  virtues  as,  purity  of  thought,  and a  fervent  and  unflinching  devotion  to  gods  and  the reverend,  and  who    exerts  himself  for   the   furtherance
Chap.  XXXV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  31^
of  the   absolute   good,   should  be  regarded  as  a  man  of Satvasara  (psychic  or  illumined)  temperament.
A  man  with  glossy,  white  and  close-set  bones, teeth,  and  nails  and  who  has  beootten  a  large family  of  children,  and  shows  a  marked  amative  ten- dency, should  be  looked  upon  as  a  man  in  whom  the  prin- ciple of  semen  decidedly  preponderates.  A  man  with  a thin  and  sinewy  bod}',  and  who  exibits  traits  of  excessive strength,  and  possesses  a  deep  resonant  voice,  and  a  pair of  large  and  handsome  eyes,  and  who  is  successful  in ever}'  walk  of  life,  should  be  looked  upon  as  one  in whom  the  principle  of  marrow  preponderates.  A  man with  a  large  head,  and  a  large  pair  of  shoulders,  and having  firm  teeth,  bones,  cheek-bones,  and  finger-nails, should  be  considered  as  one  in  whom  the  principle of  bone  preponderates.
A  man  with  a  large  and  bulky  body,  and  who  is capable  of  enduring  a  large  amount  of  fatigue  or physical  exertion,  and  who  naturally  talks  in  a  soft and  melodious  voice,  and  whose  bodily  secretions such  as  urine  and  perspiration  are  characterised  by coldness  should  be  regarded  as  one  of  a  fatty  tempera- ment. A  man  with  an  erect  and  upright  frame,  and deep-set  bones,  and  joints  in  thick  layers  of  flesh, should  be  regarded  as  one  in  whom  the  principle  of flesh  predominates.
A  man,   whose   finger  nails,  eyes,  tongue,  palate.
!
3i6
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Clmp.  xxxv
lips,  palms  of  hands  and  soles  of  feet  are  glossy,  and tinged  with  a  shade  of  red,  should  be  looked  upon  as  one in  whom  blood  forms  the  essential  and  predominant principle.  A  man  with  a  soft,  smooth  and  pleasant  skin and  hair  should  be  considered  as  one  in  whom  serum fTvak)  forms  the  essential  principle  of  the  body.  In respect  of  worldly  success  and  longevity,  men  of each  of  the  aforesaid  types  should  be  successively judged  inferior  to  men  belonging  to  the  one  pre- ceding it  in  the  above  order  of  enumeration.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject :  A  quabfied  physician  should  examine  the  dura- tion of  life  in  a  patient  with  the  help  of  the  aforesaid measures  of  limbs  and  the  essential  bodily  principles, before  proceeding  to  take  up  his  medical  treatment,  and his  professional  success  should  be  decidedly  increased thereby.
All  the  diseases,  whose  names  have  been  specifically enumerated  before,  ma}'  be  grouped  under  any  of  the three  different  heads  as  the  curable,  the  suppressible (Yapya)  and  the  incurable  (lit  :  fit  to  be  pronounced as  hopeless).
Each  of  these  different  types,  in  its  turn,  should  be carefully  observed  so  as  to  determine  whether  it  is  a primar}'  or  an  independent  disease,  or  merely  an accessory  or  sympathetic  one,  or  the  premonitory  indica- tion of  an  incipient  distemper  in  its  incubative  stage.
Chap.  XXXV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'XAM.  ^17
An  A  upasargika  (sympathetic)  disease  is  merely  a symptom  developed  in  the  course  of  an  original  or primary  malady,  and  which  has  its  foundation  in  the very  nature  or  component  factors  of  the  pre-existing distemper.  A  disease,  Avhich  manifests  itself  from  the commencement  of  a  case  and  is  neither  an  accessor}' symptom,  nor  a  premonitory  indication  of  any  other distemper,  is  called  a  Prak-kevalam  (primary  or original)  one.  A  disease  which  indicates  the  advent of  a  future  or  impending  malad}'  is  called  a  Purvaru- pam  (premonitory  stage  or  indication  of  a  disease).
The  medicinal  remedy  to  be  administered  in  any particular  case  should  be  selected  with  an  eye  to  the curative  ^•irtues  of  each  of  its  components,  so  as  not  to clash  with  the  nature  (cause)  of  the  disease  and  its accompanying  symptoms,  and  to  prove  simultaneously soothing  to  both  of  them.  On  the  contrary,  a  violent unfavourable  symptom  should  be  first  attended  to  and checked  in  a  case  where  it  would  be  found  to  have grown  stronger  and  more  distressing  or  dangerous  than the  original  malady  in  course  of  which  it  has  been developed.
A  primary  or  independent  malady,  unattended with  any  of  the  distressing  or  unfavourable  symptoms, should  be  treated  according  to  its  indications  and  the nature  of  the  deranged  humours  involved  therein, while  in   an   incubative   disease   the  treatment   should
3i8
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       Chap.  XXXV.
consist  in   subduing  a  premonitory  s^'mptom  as  soon  as it  would  make  itself  manifest.
Authoritative  Verse  on  the  sub ject  : — As  there  is  not  a  single  disease,  which  can make  its  appearance  without  the  participation  of  any  of the  deranged  bodil)'  liumours,  a  wise  physician  is  en- joined to  administer  medicines  according  to  the  specific features  of  the  deranged  humours  involved  in  a  disease whose  nature  and  treatment  have  not  even  been  de- scribed in  any  book  on  medicine.  The  different  seasons of  the  year  have  been  described  before.
IVIetricai  Texts :— In  the  cold  season,  a disease  should  be  treated  with  measures  and  remedies endued  with  the  virtue  of  destroying  or  warding  off cold,  while  in  summer  the  medicinal  treatment  should consist  of  measures  and  applications  capable  of  alla^n'ng the  heat.  The  medical  treatment  of  a  disease should  be  connnenced  just  at  the  opportune  moment, which  should  not  be  allowed  to  expire  in  vain  under any  circumstances  whatsoever.  A  course  of  medical  treat- ment commenced  at  an  inopportune  moment,  or  not resorted  to  at  the  advent  of  its  proper  time,  as  well  as over  or  insufficient  medication,  proves  abortive  even  in a  curable  type  of  disease.  The  proper  medical  treat- ment (of  a  disease)  is  that  which  successfully  copes with  the  malady  under  treatment,  and  arrests  the recrudescence  of  a  fresh  one  by   way  of  sequel,  and  not
Chap.  XXXV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  :>ig
that,  which,   though   subduing   a   particular  distemper, is  immediately  followed  by  a  new  one.
It  has  been  demonstrated  before  that  the  food  of a  man  is  digested  only  with  the  help  of  the  digestive fire  or  heat  (Pachakagni),  which  may  be  divided  into four  ditferent  kinds  (states).  One  of  these  kinds  is  due to  it  not  being  in  any  way  affected  by  the  deranged humours  of  the  body,  while  the  other  three  are  respec- tively ascribed  to  the  fact  of  their  becoming  so  deranged. The  digestive  fire  or  heat  becomes  irregular  or  fitful (Vishamagni)  through  the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu, becomes  keen,  through  the  action  of  the  deranged Pittam,  and  dull  or  sluggish,  through  the  action  of the  deranged  Kapham.  The  fourth  kind  (Sama) continues  in  a  state  unaffected  by  any  of  the  morbid humoural  constituents  of  the  body  owing  to  their maintaining  the  normal  equilibrium.
Samargni  and  Vishamei'gni  :— The  diges- tive heat,  which  l\illy  digests  the  ingested  food  at  the proper  time  without  the  least  irregularit}',  thus reflecting  the  continuance  of  the  bodily  humours  in  their normal  state,  is  called  Samagni.  The  digestive  heat which  is  irregular  in  its  action,  and  which  sometimes helps  the  process  of  complete  digestion,  and  produces distension  of  the  abdomen,  colic  pain,  constipation  of the   bowels,  dysentery,  ascites,  heaviness  of  the   limbs.
320  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  Xxxv.
rumbling  in  the  intestines,  and  loose  motions  (diarrha;a) at  other  times,  is  called  Vishamagni.
Tikshna'gni  :-  -The  digestive  heat,  which  helps the  digestion  of  even  a  heavy  meal  within  an  incredibly short  space  of  time,  is  called  "  Keen  "  (Tikshnagni)  and which  becoming  abnormally  augmented  begets  an excessive  or  voracious  appetite  (Atyagni),  helps  a glutton  to  digest  his  frequent  meals,  and  produces  a parched  throat,  palate  and  lips,  heat  and  other  dis- comforts.
Wlanda'g'ni  :— The  digestive  fire  or  heat  which causes  the  tardy  digestion  even  of  a  scanty  meal,  and produces  heaviness  of  the  abdomen  and  head,  cough, difficult  breathing,  water-brash,  nausea,  and  weariness of  the  limbs  simultaneously  with  the  taking  thereof, is  called  dull  or  sluggish  (Mandagni).
Metrical  Texts  :— The  digestive  fire  of  the Vishama  kind  brings  on  diseases  characterised  by  the derangement  of  the  Vayu.  A  keen  (Tikshna)  digestive fire  brings  on  bilious  (Pittcija)  affections,  while  a  sluggish (Manda)  fire  gives  rise  to  diseases  marked  by  a deranged  state  of  the  Kapham.  Endeavours  should  be made  to  keep  the  digestive  fire  of  the  Sama  type normal  or    regular   appetite*;  in  an  unimpaired   state.
■"  TIktc  is  a  (lifk'iencc  Ijclwccn  "Agni"  and  "appclile."  Ayni  includo liile  and  pancrcalic  sccrcliuns,  and  hence  inchcales  llie  stale  of  ones  diges- tion. Appetite,  though  not  an  iinening  indicator  of  the  ]:)r(jcess,  is  the eliecl  of  Agni.
Chap.  XXXV.  ]  SUTRAStHANAM.  321
The  one  known  as  Vishama  'irregular)  should  be  cor- rected by  a  diet  consisting'  of  emollient,  acid  or  saline substances.  In  a  case  of  abnormally  keen  digestive fire,  the  medical  treatment  should  consist  in  prescrib- ing purgatives  and  a  diet  in  the  composition  of which  sweet,  cooling,  and  fatty  or  albuminous matters  largely  enter.  The  same  treatment  should  be adopted  in  (Atyagni)  as  marked  in  cases  of  voracious appetite,  and  a  diet  consisting  of  buffalo-milk,  or  its  curd (Dadhi)  and  liquid  buffalo- butter  should  be  prescribed  for the  patient  in  addition.  Emetics  should  be  administered in  a  case  of  dull  or  sluggish  digestion  (Mandagni), and  the  patient  should  be  restricted  to  a  diet  consisting of  articles  of  a  pungent,  astringent  or  bitter  taste.
IVIetrical  Texts  :— The  fire,  that  burns  within a  person,  is  godly  in  its  subtle  essence,  and  possesses the  divine  attributes  of  atom-like  invisibility,  weight- lessness, etc.,  and  is  the  digestant  of  food.  It  takes up  the  lymph  chyle  of  different  tastes  for  the purpose  of  digestion,  and  is  invisible  owing  to  its extremely  subtle  essence.  The  three  vital  Vayus known  as  Prana,  Apana  and  Samana,  located  in  their own  spheres  within  the  organism,  feed  it  and  keep  it burning.
The  three  stages  of  man  may  be  roughly  described
as   (i)   infancy   or  childhood,   (2)  youth  or  middle  age,
and  (y  old  age  or  dotage.   Childhood  extends  up  to  the 41
322  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  xxxV.
sixteenth  year  of  life,  and  children  may  be  divided  into three  different  classes,  according  as  they  are  fed  on milk,  or  on  milk  and  boiled  rice  or  on  boiled  rice alone.  A  child  lives  exclusively  on  milk  up  to  the  first year  of  its  life,  it  is  fed  on  milk  and  boiled  rice  (hard food)  up  to  the  second  year,  and  is  thenceforward nourished  with  boiled  rice  (hard  food).
The  middle  age  of  a  man  extends  from  the  sixteenth to  the  seventieth  year  of  his  life,  and  exhibits  the  traits of  growth,  youth,  arrest  of  de^'elopment  and  decay.
The  process  of  growth  or  building  goes  on  up  to the  twentieth  year  of  life,  when  youth  or  the  age of  maturity  sets  in  and  holds  sway  over  the  body  of a  man  up  to  the  thirtieth  year  of  his  life, — the  strength, semen,  and  all  the  organs  and  vital  principles  of  the body  attain  (their  full  maturity  at  the  age  of  forty. Thenceforth  decay  gradually  sets  in  up  to  the seventieth  year  of  life.  After  that  the  strength  and energy  of  a  man  dwindle  day  by  dav.  The  organs  and virility  grow  weak  and  suffer  deterioration.  The  hair turns  to  a  silvery  white,  the  parched  skin  looks  shrivelled and  becomes  impressed  with  marks  of  dotage  (crow's feet-marks).  The  skin  hangs  down  and  becomes  flabby, the  hair  begins  to  fall  off,  and  symptoms  of  alopecia mark  the  smooth,  sheen  and  balded  pate.  The  respira- tion becomes  laboured  and  painful.  The  body,  worn  out like  an  old  and  dilapidated  building,  shakes  with   fits  of
*=^
Chap.  XXXV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  323
distressing  cough.  Such  a  man  is  incapable  of  all  acts, and  does  but  imperfectly  perform  all  bodily  functions. He  has  grown  old.
The  dose  of  medicine  should  be  increased  with  the age  of  a  patient  till  the  age  of  decay,  and  reduced  after the  expiry  of  the  seventieth  year  to  the  quantity ( which  is  usuall}'  prescribed  for  an  youth  of  sixteen).
Authoritative  verses  on  the  Sub- ject :— Kapham  is  increased  during  the  years  of childhood  and  Pittam  in  middle  age  ;  while  an  increase of  VcCyu  (nervous  derangement^  marks  the  closing  years of  life.  The  use  of  strong  or  drastic  purgatives,  and cauterisation  are  alike  prohibited  in  cases  of  children and  old  men.  They  should  be  used  only  in  weakened or  modified  forms  if  found  indispensably  necessary.
It  has  been  stated  before  that  the  body  of  a person  is  either  stout,  thin  or  of  an  average (middling)  bulk.  A  stout'  person  should  be  reduced in  bulk  with  depletive  measures,  while  a  physician should  try  to  make  a  thin  patient  gain  in  flesh.  A human  body,  which  is  neither  too  thin  nor  too  stout, should  be  made  to  maintain  its  shapely  rotundity.
We  have  already  discoursed  on  the  strength  of  the body.  Now  in  a  particular  case  under  treatment,  it  is primarily  incumbent  on  the  physician  to  enquire whether   the   patient   is  naturally  weak,  or  has  become
324
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XXXy,
so  through  a  deranged  condition  of  the  bodily  humours or  old  age.  And  since  it  is  the  strength  of  a  patient which  makes  all  remedial  measures  (such  as  cauterisa- tion, etc.)  possible,  it  should  be  regarded  as  the grandest  auxiliary  to  a  medical  treatment  of  whatsoever nature  it  may  be.
lYIetrical  Texts  :  —There  are  some  men  who are  strong  though  thin  ;  while  others  are  weak, though  stout ;  and  accordingly  a  physician  should  deter- mine the  bodily  strength  of  a  patient  by  enquiring about  the  capacity  of  his  physical  endurance  and labour.  Sattvam  or  fortitude  denotes  a  kind  of  (stoic) indifference  of  one's  mind  to  sensations  and  sources of  pleasure  or  pain.
A  man  of  strong  fortitude  (Sattvika  temperament)  is capable  of  enduring  everything,  or  any  amount  of  pain by  repressing  his  mind  with  the  help  of  his  will  or  intel- lect. A  man  of  a  Rajasika  turn  of  mind  (strong,  active, energetic)  may  be  made  to  patiently  submit  to  a  course of  painful  medical  treatment  by  means  of  persuasive counsels  and  the  logic  of  the  inevitable,  whereas  a  man of  a  Tamasika  temperament  (a  worldly  cast  of  mind characterised  by  Nescience)  is  simply  overwhelmed  at the  prospect  of  bodily  pain.
Later  on,  we  shall  have  occasion  to  deal  with  the different  types  of  physical  treatment  and  of  remedial agents  in  general.    A  particular   country,   or  a   season
Chap.  XXXV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^25
of  the  year,  a  particular  disease  or  a  peculiar  mode  of living,  any  particular  kind  of  physical  labour  or exercise,  or  the  specific  properties  of  the  water  of  any particular  locality,  or  day  sleep,  or  a  juice  of  any  parti- cular taste,  is  or  are  said  to  be  congenial  (Satmya)  to  a man,  or  a  man  is  said  to  be  naturalised  to  these  condi- tions and  environments,  when  they  fail  to  produce  any injurious  effect  on  his  health,  though  naturally  unwhole- some to  others.
Metrical  Texts  :— A  thing  of  any  taste  what- soever, or  any  kind  of  habit  or  physical  exercise  is said  to  be  congenial  to  a  man  which,  instead  of  in  any way  telling  on  his  health,  contributes  to  his  positive pleasure  and  comfort.
Features    of  an  Anupa  country:— A
country  may  be  classed  either  as  an  Anupa,  Jangala  or  a Sadharana  one,  according  to  its  distinctive  physical features.  An  Anupa  watery  or  swampy)  country contains  a  large  number  of  pools,  and  is  wooded  and undulated  with  chains  of  lofty  hills  traversing  its area,  and  which  is  impassable  owing  to  its  net- works of  rivers  and  sheets  of  accumulated  rain-water  rippling before  the  currents  of  the  gentle,  humid  air.  It  is inhabited  by  a  race  of  stout,  shapely  and  soft- bodied  men,  susceptible  to  Vatala  and  Kaphaja  diseases.
Features  of  Ja'ngala  and  Sardharrana countries  : — The   country,   which  presents  a  fiat
326  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XXXV.
surface  and  whose  dull  monotony  is  enlivened  here  and there  by  scanty  growths  of  thorny  shrubs  and  the  tops of  a  few  isolated  hills  or  knolls,  and  in  which  the  waters from  springs  and  wells,  accumulated  during  the  rains, become  nearly  drained,  and  strong  gales  of  warm  wind blow  (during  the  greater  part  of  the  year)  making  its  in- habitants, though  thin,  strong,  tough,  and  sinewy  in their  frames,  subject  to  attacks  of  diseases,  is  called Jangala.  A  country,  which  exhibits  features  common to  both  the  aforesaid  classes,  is  called  Sadharana  or ordinary.
Authoritative  Verses  on  the  Sub- ject : — A  country  derives  the  epithet  of  Sadharana from  the  ordinary  character  of  its  heat,  cold  and  rainfall, and  from  the  fact  of  the  bodilv  humours  maintaining their  normal  state  of  equilibrium  within  its  confines. A  disease  originated  in,  and  peculiar  to  a  particular country  fails  to  gain  in  intensity,  if  brought  over  to, and  transplanted  in  a  country  of  a  different  character. A  man,  who  observes  a  regimen  of  diet  and  conduct soothing  to  the  deranged  bodih'  humours  accumulated in  the  country  he  has  come  from,  and  aggravated  and manifest  in  the  shape  of  a  disease  in  the  country  he has  been  living  for  the  time  being,  need  not  apprehend any  danger  from  the  altered  conditions  of  his  new abode,  for  the  fact  of  his  not  observing  a  regimen  of diet   and   conduct  regarded  beneficial  in   consideration
Chap.  XXXV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  327
of  the  physical  features  of  the  latter  place.  A disease  of  recent  growth'  or  origin  unattended  with any  distressing  or  unfavourable  complications,  and unsuited  to  the  nature  of  the  country*,  the  season of  the  year,t  the  temperament,;  and  §  the  adopt- ed or  congenial  or  naturalised  traits  of  the  physique of  a  patient  with  a  regular  and  unimpaired  state of  digestion  (Samagnij,  and  who  exhibits  traits  of strength,  fortitude  and  longevity  and  commands  the co-operation  of  the  four  commendable  factors  of  a course  of  medical  treatment,  readily  yields  to  medicine.
A  disease,  which  is  marked  by  features  other  than those  described  above,  should  be  regarded  as  incurable, while  the  one  exhibiting  traits  common  to  both the  abovesaid  types,  should  be  looked  upon  as  ex- tremely hard  to  cure.
In  the  case  of  a  former  medicine  proving  abortive, a  different  one  should  not  be  resorted  to  as  long  as the  effect  of  the  first  would  last,  inasmuch  as  a  mixture or  a  confusion  of  medicinal  remedies  tends  to  produfce  a positively  injurious  effect.     A  medicine  or  any  medicinal
*  As  the  development  of  a  disease  due  to  the  deranged  Kapham in  a  country  of  the  JAngala  type.
+  As  the  attack  of  a  bilious  distemper  in  forewinler,  or  of  a  \'5laja malady  in  autumn,  or  of  a  Kaphaja  atifectiun  in  summer.
J  As  the  appearance  of  Kaphaja  disease  in  a  patient  of  bilious temperament.
§  As  the  appearance  of  a  Kaphaja  disease  in  a  subject  habituated to  the  use  of  viands  of  pungent  taste.
328  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chnp.  XXXV.
measure,  failing  to  produce  any  tangible  effect,  may be  repeated  in  quick  succession  in  a  difficult  or dangerous  disease,  if  it  be  empirically  found  to  be beneficial  in  the  case  under  treatment.  The  intelligent physician,  ^vho,  considering  the  nature  of  the  season, etc.,  fully  conforms  to  the  abovesaid  rules  of  medical treatment,  conquers  the  bodily  distempers  and  dispels the  gloom  of  Death  from  the  world  with  his  medical  skill.
Thus  ends  the  Thirty-fifth  Chapter  of  the  Sulrasthinam  in  the  Sushrula Samhila,  which  treats  of  clinical  oliservalions.
CHAPTER  XXXVI. Xow   we   shall    discourse   on   the   Chapter,    which treats    of    miscellaneous   remedies   for    swellings,   etc. (lYI  ish  raka- m  ad  hyayam) .  *
Metrical  Texts  :— A  medicinal  plaster,  com- posed of  Matulanga,  Agnimantha,  Devadaru,  Mahaush- dham,  Ahinsra,  and  Rasna  pasted  together  and  applied to  the  seat  of  the  affection,  leads  to  the  resolution  of  a swelhng,  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu.
A  plaster  composed  of  Durva,  Xalamulam,  Madhu- kam,  and  Chandanam,  as  well  as  plasters  composed  of drugs  of  cooling  properties,t  brings  about  the  resolution of  an  inflammatory  swelling  of  the  Pittaja  type, and  proves  similarly  beneficial  to  a  traumatic  swelling, or  to  one  which  has  its  origin  in  the  vitiated  condition of  the  blood.
Measures,  laid  down  in  connection  with  a  swelling resulting  from  the  effects  of  poison,  would  lead  to  the resolution  of  a  Pittaja  swelling  as  well.
*  The  nomenclature  of  the  chapter  is  based,  according  to  certain authorities,  on  the  fact  of  its  jointly  treating  of  eight  principal  processes of  absorption,  suppuration,  spontaneous  bursting,  etc.  of  a  swelling ;  while some  there  are  who  hold  that  the  name  of  the  chapter  is  derived  from the  fact  of  its  containing  remedial  measures  commonly  (Mishrakam  ) beneficial  to  swellings  and  ulcers.
t  Belonging  to  the  groups  (  Gana  )  of  medicinal  herbs,  which  go  by the  names  of  their  first  components,  such  as  the  Kakalyadi  group  (Gana), the  Utpalidi  group  etc.
42
330  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XXXVI.
A  plaster,  composed  of  Ajagandha,  Ashvagaiidha, Kala,  Asarala,  Ekaishika,  and  Ajashringi  pasted  together, and  applied  to  the  spot,  leads  to  the  resolution  of a  Kaphaja  swelling  (appearing  at  any  part  of  the body).
A  plaster,  composed  of  the  components  of  the  above- said  groups  of  medicinal  drugs  and  Lodhram,  Pathya, Pinditakam,  and  Ananta,  brings  about  the  resolution of  a  swelling  due  to  the  simultaneous  derangement of  the  three  fundamental  humours  of  the  body (Sannipatikam).
A  medicinal  plaster,  prescribed  for  a  swelling  due to  the  deranged  ^'ayu,  should  be  applied  by  mixing  it with  a  little  rock  salt,  acid  (Amla),  and  oil  or  clarified butter.  Similarly,  a  plaster,  prescribed  for  the  resolution of  a  Pittaja  swelling,  should  be  applied  cold,  and  with  a little  quantity  of  milk  added  to  it.  A  plaster  for  the resolution  of  a  Kaphaja  swelling  should  be  applied warm  to  the  affected  part,  and  with  the  addition  of  a considerable  quantity  of  an  alkali  and  cow's  urine.
Pare  ha  na   Plasters  :— A  piaster  composed
of  the  seeds  of  Shana,  Mula,  Shigru,  Tila  and  Sarshapa, Yava-powder,  Kinva  (enzyme),  and  linseed  pasted together,  or  one  consisting  of  thermogenetic  drugs  (such as  Kustha,  Aguru,  etc.),  would  establish  suppuration  in a  swelling.
Chap.  XXXVI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  33 1
Darrana  Plasters  :^A  plaster  composed  of Chiravilva,  Agiiika,  Danti,  Chitraka,  Hayamaraka  and the  dung  of  pigeons,  vultures  and  storks  (Kanka)  pasted together,  would  lead  to  the  spontaneous  bursting  of  a swelling.  An  alkali,  or  its  ingredients  should  be  re- garded as  a  powerful  auxiliary  in  bringing  about  the spontaneous  bursting  of  a  swelling.
Pi  dan  a  Plasters  :— A  plaster  composed  of the  roots  and  bark  of  slimy  trees  (Shalmali,  Shelu, etc.),  or  of  barley,  wheat,  and  Masha  pulse  powdered together,  would  increase  the  secretion  of  pus  from an  ulcer,  or  a  swelling  that  has  burst.*
ShOdhana  Plasters  :— A  Kashayat  decoc- tion) of  Shankhini,  Ankota,  Sumanah,  Karavira,  and Suvarchchala,  or  of  drugs  belonging  to  the  group (Ganas)  known  as  the  Aragvadadi-Varga,  should  be used  in  washing  and  purifying  (asepsising)  the  contents of  an  ulcer,  or  a  secreting  swelling.
ShOdhana  Varti  :— A  lint  saturated  with  a plaster  of  Ajagandha,  Ajashringi,  Gavakshi,  Langalahva- ya,  Putika,  Chitraka,  Patha,  Vidanga,  Ela,  Renuka, Tri-katu,  Yavakshara,  the  five  kinds  of  salt,  Manahshila,
*  The  plaster  should  be  applied  all  round  the  swelling,  leaving  its  head free  and  exposed.
t  A  decoction  with  one  part  of  a  drug  mixed  with  four,  eight  or  six- teen parts  of  water,  the  whole  being  boiled  down  to  a  quarter  pan  of  the entire  quantity.
332  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XXXVI
Kasisa,  Trivrita,  Danti,  Haritala  and  the  Saurashtra- mrittikjl,  and  inserted  into  ari  ulcer  or  an  open  swelling, brings  about  the  purification  of  its  interior,  and  these drugs  and  substances  should  be  regarded  as  the  ingre- dients of  Shodhana  Vartis  (aseptic  plugs).
Shodhana  Kalka  :— A  kalka  (aseptic  paste), composed  of  the  preceding  drugs  and  substances,  is possesed  of  the  virtue  of  purifying  the  interior  of  an ulcer,  or  open  swelling.
Oil  or  clarified  butter  prepared  with  the  aforesaid Ajagandha,  Ajashringi,  etc,  and  Kasisa,  Katurohini, Jatikanda,  and  the  two  kinds  of  Haridra,  and  applied  to an  ulcer  or  open  swelling,  purifies  its  interior.  The medicated  Ghritam  prepared  with  the  expressed juice  of  Arka  roots,  Uttama,  the  milky  juice  of Snuhi  plants,  drugs  abounding  in  alkalis,  Jati-roots,  the two  kinds  Haridra,  Kasisa,  Katurohini  and  the  aforesaid plug-drugs  (Sodhana-Varti)  pasted  together,  should  be regarded  as  possessed  of  a  virtue  similar  to  the  preced- ing one.
A  medicated  oil  prepared  with  Mayuraka, (Apang),  Rajabriksha,  Ximva,  Kosh^taki,  Tila, Vrihati,  Kantakari,  Haritala,  Manahshila,  and  the  afore- said plug-drugs  (purgative  drugs  according  to  others), should  be  used  for  the  purpose  of  purifying  the  interior of  an  ulcer.  A  pulverised  compound  consisting  of  Kasisa, Saindhava,  Kinva,  Vach.1,   the   two   kinds   of  Haridra,
Chap.  XXXVI.]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  333
and  the  component  drugs  of  the  aseptic  plug powdered  together,  should  be  used  for  the  puri- fication of  the  cavity  of  an  ulcer.  For  the  same purpose  a  condensed  extract  (Rasa-Kriya)*  should  be made  of  the  essence  of  the  drugs  belonging  to  the Salsaradi,  Patoladi,  and  Triphaladi  groups.
Dhupanam  : — A  wise  physician  should  fumigate (Dhupanam)  an  ulcer  with  the  fumes  of  a  compound consisting  of  Sriveshtaka,  Sarjarasa,  Sarala,  Devadaru, and  the  drugs  belonging  to  the  Salsaradi  group, pulverised  together  and  made  into  an  raseptici  fumigat- ing compound.
A  cold  infusion  (Shhita-Shritam)  of  trees  (Vata, Audumvara,  Ashvattha,  etc.)  which  are  cooling  and astringent  in  their  virtue,  should  be  used  in  healing  or setting  up  a  process  of  granulation  in  an  ulcer.
The  Ropana-Varti  :— Plugs  of  drugs  such  as Soma,  Amrita  (Gulancha),  and  Ashvagandha,  or  of  those belonging  to  the  Kakolyadi  group,  or  of  the  sprouts of  milk-exuding  trees  (Kshirivrikshas  such  as,  Vata, Audumvara,  etc.)  and  inserted  into  an  ulcer  tend to  help  its  granulation  (Ropana).  A  paste  (Kalka)  of Samanga,     Soma,    Sarala     wood,      Soma-Valka,    (red^
*  The  process  consists  in  mixing  the  drugs  wiih  water  weighing  eight or  sixteen  times  their  combined  weight,  and  then  boiling  them  down  to an  eighth  or  sixteenth  part  of  the  entire  quantity.
334  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap,  xxxvi.
Chandana,   and     drugs   belonging    to    the     Kakol)'adi group,  is  recommended  for  the  healing  of  an  ulcer.
A  medicated  Ghritam,  prepared  with  the  Prithak- parni,  Atmagupta,  Haridra,  Daruharidra,  Malati,  Sita, and  drugs  belonging  to  the  Kakolyadi  group,  is  renowned for  its  healing  properties.  A  medicated  oil  prepared with  Kalanusari,  Aguru,  Haridra,  Daru- Haridra, Devadaru,  Priyangu,  and  Lodhra,  is  possesed  of  a  similar efficacy.
A  pulverised  compound  consisting  of  Kanguka, Triphala,  Lodhra,  Kasisam,  Shravana  and  the  barks of  Dhava  and  Ashvakarna  powdered  together,  is possessed  of  a  similar  healing  property.  The  use  of  a pulverised  compound  consisting  of  Priyangu,  Sarjarasa, Pushpa-kasisa,  Tvaka,  and  Dhava  powdered  together is  commended  for  the  healing  of  an  ulcer.  A  condensed extract  ( Rasakriya )  of  the  bark  of  milk-exuding trees  ( such  as  Vata,  Ashvattha  etc. )  and  the drugs  known  as  the  Triphala,  should  be  successively used  for  the  healing  of  an  ulcer.
Utsardanam : — The  drugs  known  as  Apam^rga, Ashvagandha,  Talapatri,  Suvarchhala  and  those  belong- ing to  the  Kakolyadi  group,  should  be  used  for  the growth  of  flesh  in  an  ulcer  (  Utsadana  ).
Avasa'danam  : — A  compound  consisting  of K^sisa,    Saindhava  ( rock    salt ),   Kinvam,  Kuruvinda,
Chap.  XXXVI.]  SUtRAStHi^NAM.  335
Manalishila,  the  shell  of  a  hen's  egg,  the  blossoms  of Jati  flowers,  the  seeds  of  .Shirisha,  and  Karanja,  and powders  of  the  abovesaid  metals  ( Dhatus )  mixed  to- gether, should  be  used  in  destroying  the  fleshy  super- growths  of  an  ulcer  {  Avasadanam ).
A  wise  physician  should  use  all  the  drugs  and  sub- stances as  have  been  enumerated  in  connection  with  the healing  or  establishing  of  suppuration,  etc.  in  an  ulcer, or  as  many  of  them  as  would  be  available  at  the  time.
Thus  ends  ihe  ihirly-sixlh  Chapter  of  ihe  Sulrasthdnam  in  the    Sushruta Sanihitd  which  treats  of  miscellaneous  remedies  for  inflammatory  swellings.
CHAPTER    XXXVII.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which  deals with  the  distinctive  traits  of  the  different  classes  of  soil commended  for  the  growth  or  culture  of  medicinal herbs  (Bhumi-Pravibha'ga-Vijna'niya- madhyaryam).
These  are  the  general  features  of  a  ground  which  is recommended  for  the  culture  of  medicinal  plants  or herbs.  A  plot  of  ground,  whose  surface  is  not  broken  or rendered  uneven  by  the  presence  of  holes,  ditches,  gravel and  stones,  nor  is  loose  in  its  character,  and  which  is not  disfigured  by  ant-hills,  nor  used  for  the  purposes  of a  cremation  or  execution  ground,  and  which  does  not occupy  the  site  of  a  holy  temple,  is  favourable  for  the growth  of  medicinal  herbs.  A  ground  which  possesses  a soil  which  is  glossy,  firm,  steady,  black,  yellowish  or red  and  does  not  contain  any  sand,  potash  or  any  other alkaline  substance,  and  is  favourable  to  the  germination of  plants  and  easily  pervious  to  the  roots  of  plants growing  thereon,  and  which  is  supplied  with  the necessary  moisture  from  a  close  or  adjacent  stream  or reservoir  of  water,  is  recommended  for  the  growth  of medicinal  plants  and  herbs.  Plants  should  be  regard- ed as  partaking  of  the  virtues  of  the  ground  they  grow upon.  A  plant,  growing  in  such  a  commendable  site, should  be  examined  as  to  its  being  infested  with  worms
Chap.  XXXVII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  337
or  insects,  or  as  to  its  being  anywise  infected  with poison,  or  cut  with  an  arm,  or  affected  by  winds, atmospheric  heat,  or  an  animal's  body.  It  should be  culled  or  uprooted  in  the  event  of  it  being  found sound,  healthy,  deep-rooted,  full-bodied,  and  of matured  sap.  The  gatherer  should  look  towards  the north  at  the  time  of  culling.
A  plot  of  ground  with  a  pebbly,  steady,  heavy,  dusky or  dark  coloured  soil,  and  which  conduces  to  the  growth of  large  trees,  and  yields  rich  harvests  of  corn,  should be  regarded  as  permeated  with  the  specific  virtues  of essential  Earth-matter.
A  ground  having  a  cool,  glossy,  white  coloured  soil, which  is  adjacent  to  water,  and  whose  surface  is  covered with  a  lavish  growth  of  glossy  weeds  and  luscious shady  trees,  should  be  considered  as  characterised  by the  essential  properties  of  water  (Amvuguna .  A ground  having  a  gravelly  soil  of  varied  colours,  and which  contributes  only  to  the  germination  of  scanty  and yellowish  sprouts,  should  be  looked  upon  as  permeated with  the  attributes  of  essential  fire  (Agmguna).  A ground  with  an  ash-coloured  or  ass-coloured  (grey ,  soil, and  on  which  withered  looking,  sapless,  large-holed  trees of  stunted  growth,  somehow  eke  out  a  miserable existence,  should  be  considered  as  being  controlled  by the  specific  properties  of  air  (Anilaguna)  ;  while  the one  having  a  soft,  level  surface  with  large  trees  and  lofty
43
338
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XXXVII.
hills  cropping  up  at  intervals  thereon,  and  which  is covered  with  growths  of  weeds  and  under-shrubs,  and  is endued  with  a  dark  soil,  kept  moist  and  sappy  by  the percolation  of  invisible  (subterranean)  water,  should  be looked  upon  as  permeated  with  the  essential  properties of  sky  (Akashaguna).
According  to  certain  authorities,  the  roots,  leaves, bark,  milk\^  exudations,  essence  and  fruits  (seeds)  of medicinal  plants  and  herbs,  should  be  respectively  culled in  the  early  part  of  the  rains  (Pravrit)  and  in  the  rainy season  proper  (Varsha\  autumn,  (Sharat),  fore- winter (Hemanta),  spring  (Vasanta)  and  summer  (Grishma). But  we  cannot  subscribe  to  that  opinion  inasmuch  as the  nature  or  essential  temperament  of  the  earth  is  both cool  (Saumya)  and  hot  (Agneya).  Accordingly  drugs  of cooling  virtues  should  be  culled  during  the  cold  seasons of  the  year,  and  the  heat- making  ones  in  the  hot  season, as  they  do  not  become  divested  of  their  native  virtues  at those  seasons  of  the  year.  Medicinal  plants  of  cooling virtues,  which  are  grown  on  a  soil  of  cool  temperament and  are  culled  during  the  cool  seasons  of  the  year, become  intensely  sweet,  cooling  and  glossy.  These remarks  hold  good  of  other  medicinal  plants  and  herbs.
Herbs  of  purgative  properties,  which  are  grown  on a  soil  permeated  with  the  specific  virtues  of  water or  earth  matter,  should  be  culled  as  the  most  effective of  their  kind.    Similarly,  herbs  of  emetic  virtues  should
Chap.  XXXVII.]        SUTRASTHA'NAM.
3.^9
be  culled  from  a  ground  permeated  with  the  essential virtues  of  fire,  sky  and  air.
Herbs  exercising  both  purgative  and  emetic  virtues should  be  culled  from  ground  exhibiting  features common  to  both  the  two  aforesaid  classes  of  soil. Similarly,  herbs  possessed  of  soothing  properties (Sanshamanam)*  are  found  to  exert  a  stronger  action in  the  event  of  their  being  reared  on  a  soil  permeated with  the  essential  properties  of  sk5\
All  medicinal  herbs  and  substances  should  be  used as  fresh  as  possible,  excepting  Pippali,  Vidanga,  Madhu, Guda,  and  Ghritam,  fwhich  should  be  used  in  a  matured condition  i.e.  not  before  a  year;.  The  milky  juice  or  sap of  a  medicinal  tree  or  plant  should  be  regarded  as  strong and  active  under  all  circumstances.  Herbs  and  drugs, that  had  been  culled  or  collected  within  the  year,  might be  taken  and  used  in  making  up  a  medicinal  recipe  in  a case  where  fresh  ones  would  not  be  available.
Authoritative  Verses  on  the  Sub- ject— Medicinal  herbs  and  plants  should  be  recognis- ed and  identified  with  the  help  of  cowherds,  hermits, huntsmen,  forest-dwellers,  and  those  who  cull  the  fruits and  edible  roots  of  the  forest.  Xo  definite  time  can be  laid  down  for  the   culling  of   the  leaves  and  roots  of
*  Herbs  or  drugs,  which  in  virtue  of  their  own  essential  properties soothe  or  subdue  a  disease  without  eliminating  the  morbid  humours or  without  exercising  any  emetic  or  purgative  action.
340         THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap,  xxxvil.
medicinal  plants,  etc.,  such  as  are  used  in  compounding the  recipe,  which  is  called  the  Patra-lavanam,  and  which covers,  within  its  therapeutic  range,  diseases,  which  are peculiar  to  the  entire  organism  (such  as  Vata-vyadhi, etc).*
As  soil  admits  of  being  divided  into  six  different classes  according  to  its  smell,  colour,  taste,  etc.  so the  sap  of  a  medicinal  plant  may  assume  an}'  of  the six  different  tastes  through  its  contact  with  the  peculiar properties  of  the  soil  it  grows  on.  Tastes  such  as^ sweet,  etc.,  remain  latent  in  water,  which  imparts  them to  the  soil  in  a  patent  or  perceptible  condition.
A  plot  of  ground,  exhibiting  traits  peculiar  to  all  the five  fundamental  material  principles  (such  as  the  earth water,  fire,  etc.),  is  said  to  be  possessed  of  a  soil of  general  character  (Sadharani  Bhumi),  and  medicinal plants  and  herbs  partake  of  the  specific  virtues  of  the soil  the}'  grown  on.
Drugs,  whether  fresh  or  old,  and  emitting  a  contrary smell,  or  in  any  way  affected  as  regards  their  natural sap  or  juice,  should  not  be  used  for  pharmaceutical purposes.
The  virtues  of  such  medicinal  drugs  and  substances such   as   Vidanga,   Pippali,  Madhu,  and  Guda,  improve
*  ITence  the  doctrine,  as  regards  the  culling  of  the  difterent  parts  of  a medicinal  plant  such  as,  the  leaves,  roots,  etc.,  in  the  different  seasons of  the  year,  naturally  falls  to  the  ground.
Chap.  XXXVII.  ]         SUTRASTHA'NAM.  34 1
(after  a  year.  Accordingly  all  drugs  and  n^.edicinal herbs,  excepting  the  preceding  ones,  should  be  used fresh  and  unsoiled,  or  uninjured  by  insects.
Blood,  nails,  or  hair  etc.,  of  animals,  '^officinally  laid down  to  be  used  in  our  Pharmacopoeia),  should  be  taken from  young  and  healthy  animals,  and  the  ordure,  urine, or  milk  of  an  animal,  (enjoined  to  be  used  for  medicinal purposes),  should  be  collected  at  a  time  after  it  has completed  its  digestion.
The  pharmacy  and  the  medicinal  store  of  a  physician should  occupy  a  commendable  site  and  an  auspicious quarter  of  the  sky  (Xorth  or  East),  and  the  collected medicines  should  be  kept  tied  in  pieces  of  clean  linen,  or stored  in  earthen  vessels  and  hollow  tubes  of  wood,  or suspended  on  wooden  pegs.
Thus  ends  the  thirty-seventh  Chapter  of  the  Sutrasthanam  in  the Sushruta  Samhit^  wliich  treats  of  the  Classification  of  grounds  for  the culture  of  medicinal  plants  and  herhs,  etc.
CHAPTER    XXXVIII.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  deals with  the  general  classification  of  drugs  according  to their  therapeutical  properties  (Dravya-Sangra- haniya-madhyaryam).
These  drugs  are  usually  made  into  thirty-seven different  groups  (Gana)  which  are  as  follows  : —
The  Vidarigandha'cli  Croup:— The  drugs
known  as  Vidarigandha,  Vidari,  Sahadeva,  Vishvadeva, Shvadanstra,  Prithakparni,  Shatavari,  Sariva,  black Sariva,  Jivaka,  Rishavaka,  Mahasaha,  Kshudra-Saha, Vrihati,  Kantakari,  Punarnava,  Eranda,  Hansapadi, Vrishchikah,  and  Rishavi,  form  the  group  known  as  the Vidari-gandhadi.
IVIetrical  Text  : — The  present  gi-oup  of  drugs subdues  the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Pittam and  proves  beneficial  in  phthisis  ;Shosha~^,  Gulma,  aching of  the  limbs,  Urdha  Shvasa  and  cough.
The  A'ragvadha'di  Group  :— The  drugs known  as  Aragvadha,  Madana,  Gopaghonta,  Kutaja, Patha,  Kantaki^  Patala,  Murva,  Indrayava,  Saptaparna, Ximva,  Kuruntaka,  Dasi-kuruntaka,  the  two  kinds  of Karanja,  Patola,  Kiratttikua,  Guduchi,  Chitraka, Sh^ngshta,  and  Susha^•i  form  the  group  known  as the  Aragvadhjidi.
Chap.  XXXVIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  343
Metrical  Text  :  — The  group  under  discus- sion destroys  the  deranged  Kaphani  and  the  effects  of poison  and  proves  beneficial  in  cases  of  Meha  (^morbid discharges  from  the  urethra),  Kushtha,  fever,  vomiting and  itching  of  the  body  and  acts  as  a  purifying (aseptic)  agent  in  the  case  of  an  ulcer.
The  Varuna'di  Group  :  —The  drugs  known as  Varuna,  Artagala,  Shigru,  Madhu-Shigi-u,  Tarkari, Mesha-Shringi,  Putika,  Xaktamala,  Morata,  Agni- mantha,  the  two  kinds  of  Sairiyaka,  Vimvi,  Vasuka, Vasira,  Chitraka,  Shatavari,  Mlva,  Ajashringi,  Darbha, and  the  two  kinds  of  Vrihati  form  the  group  known as  the  Varunadi.
IVIetrical  Text  :  —The  group  is  possessed  of  the efficacy  of  reducing  the  deranged  Kapham  and fat  and  proves  efficacious  in  cases  of  cephalaegia,  Gulma and  internal  abscesses.
The   Viratarva'di     Group  :— The    drugs
known  as  Virataru,  the  two  kinds  of  Sahachara,  Darbha, Vrikshadani,  Gundra,  I\'ala,  Kusha,  Kasha,  Ashma- bhedaka,  Agnimantha,  Morata  Vasuka,  Vasira, Bhalluka,  Kuruntaka,  Indivara,  Kapotavanka,  and Sh^adanstra  enter  into  the  composition  of  the  group known  as  the  Viratarvadi.
IVIetrical  Text  :— The  group  subdues  all  dis- orders incidental  to   the   deranged   state   of  Vata   and
344         1*ilE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     t  Chap,  xxxvili.
proves      curative      in     Ashmari,      Sharkara,     Mutra- krichhra,  Mutraghata  and  urinary  troubles.
The  Sa^Iasara'di  Group  :— The  group  of medicinal  drugs,  known  as  the  Salasaradi,  consists  of Salasara,  Ajakarna,  Khadira,  Kadara,  Kalaskandha, Kramuka,  Bhurjja,  Meshashringi,  Tinisha,  Chandana, Kuchandana,  Shinshapa,  Shirisha,  Asana,  Dhava, Arjuna,  Tala,  Shaka,  Xaktamala,  Putika  Ashvakarna, Aguru  and  Kaliyaka.
IVIctrical  Texts  ;  -The  group  of  the  drugs, known  as  the  Salasaradi  Gana,  destroys  the  germ  of Kushtha,  absorbs  the  deranged  fat  and  Kapham  and proves  beneficial  in  morbid  discharges  from  the  urethra (Meha\  chlorosis   or  jaundice  (Pandu).
The  Rodhrardi  Group:— The  group  of  medi- cinal drugs  known  as  the  Rodhradi  consists  of  Rodhra, Savararodhra,  Palasha  Kutannata,  Ashoka,  Phanji, Katphala,  Elabaluka,  Sallaki,  Jingini,  Kadamva,  Sala and  Kadali.
IVIetrical  Texts  :— The  group  is  antidotal  to the  deranged  Kapham  and  fat,  is  astringent  in  its properties,  removes  vaginal  and  uterine  disorders, neutralises  the  effects  of  poison  (anti  toxic)  and acts  as  a  stj'ptic  and  purifying  agent  in  a  case  of  ulcer and  arrests  all  secretions  and  excretions  of  the  body.
The  Arkardi  Group  :--The  drugs  known as   the     Arka,     Alarka,    the     two   kinds   of    Karanja,
Chap.  XXXVIII.]        SUtRASTHANAM.  345
Nagadanti,  Mayuraka,  Bhargi,  Rasna,  Indrapiishpi, Kshudrashveta  Mahashveta,  Vrishchikali,  Alavana  and Tapasha-Vriksha,  enter  into  the  composition  of  the group  known  as  the  Arkadi  Gana.
Metrical  Texts:— The  group  known  as  the Arkadi  destroys  Kaphani,  fat,  and  the  effects  of poison.  It  acts  as  a  vermifuge  and  a  specific  aseptic agent  in  the  case  of  an  ulcer  and  proves  curative  in diseases  of  the  skin.
The  Surasa'di  Group  :— The  drugs  known as  Surasa,  white  Surasa,  Fainjjhaka,  Arjaka,  Bhustrina, Sugandhaka,  Sumukha,  Kalamala,  Kashamarda, Kshavaka,  Kharpushpa,  Vidanga,  Katphala_,  Surasi, Nirgundi,  Kulahala,  Indurakarnika,  Phanji,  Prachi- vala,  Kakamachi  and  Vishamushtika  form  the  group known  as  the  Surasadi  Gana.
IVIetrical  Texts :— The  group  acts  as  a vermifuge  and  is  an  aseptic  agent.  It  subdues  the deranged  Kapham  and  proves  beneficial  in  catarrh, non-relish  for  food,  asthma  and  cough.
The  lYIushkaka'di  Group:— The  group  of medicinal  drugs  known  as  the  Mushkakadi  consists  of Mushkaka,  Palasha,  Dhava,  Chitraka,  Madana, Shinshapa,  Vajra-Vriksha  and  Triphala.
Metrical      Text  :— The      present      group      is possessed  of  the  therapeutic  virtue  o-f  destroying  fat  and 44
346         THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.    [  Chap.  XXXVIII.
removing  the  defects  of  semen.  Meha,  piles,  jaundice, chlorosis,  gravels  and  urinary  calculi  in  the  bladder are  the  diseases  which  yield  Lo  its  curative  efficac)'.
The    Pippalya'di    Group: -The  group  of
medicinal  drugs  known  as  the  Pippalyadi  consists  of Pippali,  Pippali  mulam,  Chavya,  Chitraka,  Shringavera, Maricha,  Hasti-Pippali,  Harenuka,  Ela,  Ajamoda, Indrayava,  Patha,  Jiraka,  Sarshapa,  Maha-Nimva-Phala, Hingu,  Bhargi,  Madhurasa,  Ativisha,  Vacha,  Vidanga and  Katurohini.
IVIetrical  Text : — The  present  group  acts  as  a good  appetiser  and  is  an  absorbant  of  intestinal  mucous and  unassimilated  lymph  chyle.  The  range  of  its  thera- peutical application  includes  catarrh,  deranged  Kapham and  Vatam,  non-relish  for  food,  abdominal  glands,  colic and  gastralgia.
The  Elardi  Group  : — The  group  of  medicinal drugs  known  as  the  Eladi-Gana  consists  of  Ela,  Tagara, Kushtha,  M^nsi,  Dhyamaka,  Tvaka,  Patra,  Naga- pushpa,  Priyangu,  Harenuka,  Vyaghranakha,  Shukti, Clianda,  Sthauneyaka,  Shriveshtaka,  Chocha,  Choraka, Valaka,  Guggulu,  Sarjarasa,  Turushka,  Kunduruka, Aguru,  Sprikka,  Ushira,  Bhadradaru,  Kumkuma, Punnaga  and  Keshara.
IVIetrical  Text  :— The  therapeutic  virtue  of the  group  consists  in  subduing  the  action   of  V^yu  and
Chap.  XXXVIII.]        SUTRASTHANAM.
347
Kapham  and  in  neutralising  the  effects  of  poison.  It  is a  cosmetic  and  arrests*  the  eruption  of  pimples and  other  vegetations  on  the  skin  such  as  rash,  urticaria etc.  and  checks  the  itching  sensation  incidental thereto.
The  Vach2rcli  and  Haridrardi  Groups :-
The  groups  known  as  the  Vachadi  and  Haridradi Ganas,  respectively  consist  of  Vacha,  Musta,  Ativisha, Abhaya,  Bhadradaru,  Nagakeshara  (Vachadi),  Haridra, Daruharidr^,  Kalashi,  Kutaja  seeds  and  Madhuka (Haridradi).
IVIetrical  Text: — These  two  groups  are  the purifiers  of  breast  milk  and  specifically  act  as  the assimilators  of  the  deranged  humours  of  the  body,  their curative  properties  being  markedly  witnessed  in  cases of  mucous  dysentery  (Amatisiira).
The  Shy^mardi  Group  : -The  drugs  known as  Shyama,  Mahd-Shyam^,  Trivrit,  Danti,  Shan- khini,  Tilvaka,  Kampillaka,  Ramyaka,  Kramuka, Putrashroni,  Gavakshi,  Rajavriksha,  the  two  kinds of  Karanja,  Guduchi,  Saptala,  Chhagalantri,  Sudh^  and Suvarnakhiri,  form  the  group  known  as  the  Shyam^di Gana.
Metrical  Text : — This  group  is  possessed  of the  therapeutic  virtue  of  curing  abdominal  glands  and acts  as  an    anti-toxic.    It  proves  beneficial  in  An^ha
148
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XXXVIII.
'epistasis),  abdominal  dropsy  and  diarrhoea  and  is  one of  the  most  reliable  purgatives  in  cases  of  obstinate constipation  of  the  bowels  with  suppression  of  urine and  distention  of  the  abdomen  (Udavarta).
The  Vrihatya'di  Group  :-^The  drugs  known as  Vrihati,  Kantakarika,  Kutajaphala,  Patha  and Madhuka  combinedly  form  the  group  known  as  the Vrihatyadi  Gana.
IVIctrical  Text :— The  group  is  a  good  digestant or  assimilator  of  the  deranged  humours.  It  subdues the  deranged  Vata,  Pitta  and  Kapham  and  proves efficacious  in  cases  of  nausea,  water-brash,  d^'suria  and non- relish  for  food.
The  Patola'di  Group:— The  drugs  known as  Patola,  Chandana,  Kuchandana,  Murva,  Guduchi, Patha,  and  Katurohini  form  the  group  known  as  the Patoladi  Gana.
IVIetrical  Text  : — The  group  is  a  febrifuge  and anti-toxic,  and  its  therapeutic  action  consists  in  destroy- ing the  action  of  the  deranged  Pittam  and  Kapham.  It restores  the  natural  relish  of  the  patient  for  food, removes  vomiting,  and  proves  beneficial  in  ulcers, and  itching  erythematous  eruptions.
The  Ka'kolya'di  Group  :— The  drugs  known as  Kakoli-Kshira-Kakoli,  Jivaka,  Rishabhaka,  Mudga- parni,    Mashaparni,    Meda,    Mah^meda,    Chhinna-ruha,
Chap.  XXXVIII.]         SUTRASTHA'NAM.
349
Karkata-Shringi,  Tugakshiri,  Padmaka,  Prapaundarika, Riddhi,  Vriddhi,  Mridvika,  Jivanti  and  Madhuka,  com- binedly  form  the  group  known  as  the  Kakolyadi  Gana.
IVIetrical  Text  :— The  group  of  medicinal drugs  under  discussion  subdues  the  action  of  the deranged  Pittam,  blood  and  Vayu.  It  increases  the quantity  of  milk  in  the  breast  f  galactagogue)  and favours  the  accumulation  of  phlegm  (Kapham)  in  the body.  It  is  a  restorative  and  an  elixir  and  is  endued  with the  therapeutic  virtue  of  augmenting  the  virile  potency of  a  man.
The  Ushaka'di  Group  :— The  medicinal drugs  and  substances  known  as  Ushaka  (alkaline  earth) Saindhava  salt,  Shilajatu,  the  two  kinds  of  Kasisa, Hingu  and  Tutthaka  enter  into  the  composition  of  the group  known  as  the  Ushakadi  Gana.
IVIetrical  Text :  — It  destroys  kapham  mucous), absorbs  the  fat  of  the  body  and  proves  curative  in  cases .of  stone   or   gravel   in   the  bladder   (urinary    calculi), dysuria  and  abdominal  glands  fGulma\
The  Sa'riva'di  Group  :— The  drugs  known as  Sariva,  Madhuka,  Chandana,  Kuchandana,  Padmaka, Kashmari  phala,  Madhuka-pushpa  and  Ushira_,  com- binedly  form  the  group  known  as  the  Sarivadi  Gana.
IVIetrical  Text  :— The  group  under  discussion allays  thirst  and  proves  curative  in  a  case  of  haemoptysis.
350        'i'HE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XXXVIII.
Its  therapeutic  virtue  consists  in  curbing  an  attack of  bilious  (Pittaja)  fever  and  in  specifically  alleviating the  burning  sensation  (Daha)  of  the  body.
The  Anjana'di  Group  :-The  group  known as  the  Anjanadi  Gana  consists  of  Anjana,  Rasanjana, Nagapushpa,  Priyangu,  Nilotpala,  Nalada,  Nalina, Keshara  and  Madhuka.
Metrical  Texts  :— An  attack  of  hasmoptj-sis readily  5n'elds  to  the  curative  virtue  of  the  group  under discussion.  It  is  anti-toxic  in  its  character  and  allays the  internal  burning  sensation  of  the  body.
The  Parushaka'di  Group:— The  gioup known  as  the  Parushakadi  Gana  consists  of  Parushaka, Dr^ksha,  Kat-phala,  Dadima,  Rajadana,  Kataka-phala Shaka-phala  and  Triphala.
lYIetrical  Text  : — It  subdues  the  deranged Vayu,  allays  thirst,  acts  as  a  cordial,  increases  one's relish  for  food 'and  cures  the  diseased  or  abnormal  com- ponents of  urine  or  its  defects.
The  Priyangvardi  Group:— The  group  of medicinal  drugs  known  as  the  Priyangvadi  Gana  consists of  Priyangu,  Samang^,  Dhataki,  Naga-pushpa,  Chandana, Kuchandana,  Mocharasa,  Rasanjana,  Kumbhika, Srotohnjana,  Padma- keshara,  Jojanvalli,  and  Dirghamula.
The  Amvashtha'di  Group:— Drugs  known as  Amvashth^,   Dhataki  flowers,   Samanga,   Katvanga,
Chap.  XXXVIII.]         SUTRASTHANAM.  351
Madhuka,  Vilva-peshika,  Rodhra,  Savara-Rodhra, Palasha,  Xandi-Vriksha  and  Padma  keshara,  enter  into the  composition  of  the  group  known  as  the  Amvashthadi Gana.
lYletrical  Text:— The  two  medicinal  recipes or  groups  prove  beneficial  in  a  case  of  deranged  Pitta, favour  the  heahng  of  ulcers,  bring  about  the  adhesion of  fractured  bones  and  prove  curative  in  cases  of dysentery  where  the  stools  are  found  to  consist  of lumps  of  thick  and  matured  mucous  (Pakvatisara.)
The  Nya'grodha'di  Croup:— The  drugs known  as  Nyagrodha,  Audumvara,  Ashvattha,  Plaksha, Madhuka,  Kapitana,  Kakubha,  Amra,  Koshamra, Chorakapatra,  the  two  sorts  of  Jamvu,  Piyala,  Madhuka (Maula),  Rohini,  Vanjula,  Kadamva,  Vadari,  Tinduki, Sallaki,  Rodhra,  Savara-Rodhra,  Bhallataka,  Palasha, and  Nandi-Vriksha,  combinedly  form  the  group  known as  the  Nyagodhradi  Gana.
Metrical  Texts  : — This  group  proves  bene- ficial in  cases  of  ulcer,  cures  all  disorders  of the  uterus  and  vagina,  favours  the  adhesion  of fractured  bones  and  all  sorts  of  secretions  of  the body  in  addition  to  its  astringent  properties  (Sangrahi) and  proves  curative  in  a  case  of  haemoptysis.  It  is an  anti-fat  and  assuages  the  burning  sensation  of the  body.
352        THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.    [  Chap,  xxxviii.
The  Guduchya'di  Group  :— The  drugs known  as  Guduchi,  Ximva,  Kustumvuru,  Chandana, and  Padmaka,  combinedly  form  the  group  known  as the  Guduchyadi  Gana.
IVIctrical  Text:— It  is  a  good  appetiser,  and acts  as  a  general  febrifuge  and  successfully  combats such  symptoms  as  nausea,  want  of  relish  for  food, vomiting,  thirst  and  burning  sensation  of  the  body.
The  Utpala'di  Group  :— The  drugs  known as  Utpala,  Raktotpala,  Kumuda  Saugondhika,  Kuvalaya, Pundarika  and  Madhuka  constitute  the  group  known as  the  Utpaladi  Gana.
lYIetrical  Texts  : — This  group  is  possessed  of the  therapeutic  virtue  of  allaying  thirst  and  corrects the  deranged  Pittam  and  the  vitiated  blood.  It assuages  the  burning  sensation  of  the  body  and  proves curative  in  cases  of  vomiting,  in  Hridroga  (Angina pectoris'^  in  syncope,  in  ha3mopt\sis  and  in  cases  of poisoning  as  well.
The  lYIusta'di  Group  :— The  group  of drugs  known  as  Mushtadi  Gana  is  composed  of Musta,  Haridra,  Daru-Haridra,  Haritaki,  Amlaki, Vibhitaka,  Kushtha,  Haimavati,  Vacha,  Patha,  Katu- rohini,  Sharngashta,  Ativisha,  Dravidi,  Bhallataka  and Chitraka.
Chap.  XXXVIII.]         SUTRASTHANAM.  ^53
Metrical  Text : — The  group  under  discussion destroys  the  deranged  Shleshma,  cures  uterine  and vaginal  disorders,  purifies  the  breast  milk  of  a  mother, and  acts  as  a  good  digestant  (Pachana).
The  Triphalar  Group  :- The  drugs  known Haritaki,  Amlaki  and  Vibhitaka,  constitute  the  group known  as  the  Triphaladi  Gana.
Metrical  Text  :— The  present  group  destroys the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu,  Kapham  and  Pittam and  proves  curative  in  Meha,  and  in  diseases  of  the  skin (Kushtham).  It  is  a  good  appetiser,  improves  the eyesight  and  proves  beneficial  in  chronic  intermittent fever  (Vishama-jvara).
The  Trikatu  Group  :— The  Trikatu  group consists  of  Pippali,  Maricha  and  Shringavera.
Metrical  Text  :— It  destroys  fat  and  Kapham, proves  curative  in  cutaneous  affections,  leprosy (Kushtha),  and  morbid  discharges  from  the  urethra,  and is  possessed  of  the  virtue  of  curing  abdominal  glands, catarrh,  dullness  of  the  appetite  and  indigestion.
The  A'mlakya'di  Group  :— The  group known  as  the  Amlakyadi  Gana  consists  of  Amlaki, Haritaki,   Pippali  and  Chitraka.
Metrical  Text  : — The  present  group  of  medici- nal drugs  acts  as  a  general  febrifuge  and   may   be   used 45
^54        THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.    [  Chap,  xxxviil.
with  advantage  in  fevers  of  whatsoever  type.  Moreover, it  is  an  aphrodisiac  and  acts  as  a  general  tonic  or  resto- rative and  appetiser,  destroying  the  deranged  Kapham and  improving  the  eyesight.
The  Trapvardi  Group  :—Tlie  group  known as  the  Trapvadi  Gana  consists  of  Trapu,  Sisa,  Tamra, Rajata,  Krishna-Lauha,  Suvarna  and  Lohamala.
lYIctrical  Text  :— The  present  group  is regarded  as  a  good  vermifuge  and  possessed  of  the  virtue of  neutrahsing  the  effects  of  chemical  poison  originated through  incompatible  combinations.  Its  therapeutic range  covers  jaundice,  chlorosis,  Melia  (morbid  secre- tions from  the  uretlira),  Hridroga  (heart  disease),  thirst and  maladies  incidental  to  the  effects  of  poison.
The  La'ksha'di  Group  :— The  drugs  known as  the  Laksha,  Arevata,  Kutaja,  Ashvamara,  Katphalam, Haridra,  Daru-Haridra,  Ximva,  Saptachchhada,  Malati, and  Trayamana  form  the  Lakshadi  Gana.
Metrical  Text  : — This  consists  of  astringent, bitter  and  sweet  taste  (Rasa)  and  acts  as  a  good vermifuge  and  a  purifying  (aseptic)  agent  in  cases of  bad,  malignant  or  indolent  ulcers.  Diseases  due  to the  deranged  Kapham  and  Pittam  prove  amenable  to  its curative  properties,  which  extend  to  cases  of  cutaneous affections  (Kushtham)  as  well.     Now  we  shall  describe
Chap.  XXXVIII.]        SUTRASTHANAM.  ^^^
the  five  groups  of  medicinal  roots  (Mulam),  each consisting  of  similar  number  of  components.
The  Svalpa  Panchamulam  Croup  :—
The  group  known  as  the  mmor  group  of  five  roots (Svalpa-Pancha-Mula)  consists  of  the  roots  of  medicinal plants  known  as  the  Trikantaka,  the  two  species  of Vrihati,  Prithakparni,  and  Vidarigandha.
lYIetrical  Texts  : — The  compound  possesses  a taste  blended  of  astringent,  bitter  and  sweet.  It  is  a tonic  and  aphrodisiac,  subdues  the  deranged  Yayu  and proves  soothing  to  the  deranged  Pittam.
The    IVlahat    Panchamula   Croup:—
The  one  known  as  the  great  or  the  major  group  of five  medicinal  roots  (Mahat-Pancha-Mula)  consists  of the  roots  of  such  trees  as  Vilva,  Agnimantha, Tuntuka,  Patala  and  Kashmari.
Metrical  Texts  :— It  is  bitter  in  taste  and subdues  the  deranged  Kapham  and  Vatam.  It  is  light (easily  digestible)  and  appetising,  and  acquires  a  sub- sequent sweet  taste  in  its  reaction  (Anurasa).
The     Dashamula     Croup  :— The    two
preceding  groups  in  combination  form  the  one  techni- cally known  as  the  Dasha-Mulam  (the  ten  roots),  which is  possessed  of  the  virtue  of  destroying  the  deranged Vata,  Pittam  and  Kapham.  It  proves  beneficial  in  cases  of asthma  and   difficult  respiration.     It  acts  as  a    good
356
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  XXXVIII.
digestant  in  respect  of  undigested  lymph  chyle,  etc  and is  used  with  satisfactory  results  in  all  types  of  fever.
The    Valli-Panchamulam    Group:—
The  group  consisting  of  the  roots  of  the  five  medicinal creepers  known  as  Vidari,  Sariva,  Rajani,  Guduchi and  Aja-Shringi,  is  called  the  Valli-Panchamulam.
The  Pancha-kantakam  Groups— Simi- larly, the  group  consisting  of  the  five  medicinal (thorny)  shrubs  known  as  Karamradda,  Trikantaka, Sairiyaka,  Shatavari,  and  Gridhranakhi,  is  called  the Pancha-  Kantaka.
Metrical  Texts  : — The  two  preceding  groups prove  curative  in  Hcemoptysis  and  in  all  the  tliree types  of  anasarca  or  cedema  (Shopha).  Moreover,  it  has the  incontestable  virtue  of  arresting  all  sorts  of  urethral discharges  and  is  a  potent  remedy  in  all  cases  of  seminal disorders.
The  Pancha-Trina  Group  :- The  group consisting  of  the  five  medicinal  herbs  (of  the  grass species)  and  known  as  Kusha,  Kasha,  Nala,  Darbha, Kandekshuka,  is  called  the  Pancha-Trina.
Metrical  Texts  : — Cases  of  Haemoptysis,  renal defects  or  of  uninary  diseases  are  found  to  speedily  yield to  the  curative  efficacy  of  the  compound  internally administered  through  the  medium  of  cow's  milk.
Metrical  Texts -.—The  first  two  of  the   afore-
Chap.  XXXVIII.]         SUTRASTHA'NAM.  357
said  groups  of  Panchamulas  (viz.,  the  Svalpa  and  the Vrihat  Panchamulas)  are  possessed  of  the  virtue  of destroying  the  deranged  Vata,  while  the  one  standing  in the  bottom  of  the  list  (Trina-Panchamula)  is  endued  with the  property  of  killing  the  deranged  Pittam.  Those  stand- ing third  and  fourth  in  order  of  enumeration  (the  Valli and  Kantaka  Panchamulas)  subdue  the  deranged  Kapham.
The  groups  of  medicinal  drugs  and  roots  have  thus been  briefly  described,  which  will  be  more  elaborately dealt  with  later  on  in  the  chapter  on  Therapeutics.
An  intelligent  physician  should  prepare  plasters, decoctions,  medicated  oils,  Ghritas  (medicated  clarified butter)  or  potions,  according  to  the  exigencies  of  each individual  case.*  The  groups  enumerated  above  should be  therapeutically  used  according  to  the  nature  of  the deranged  humours  involved  in  each  individual  case. Only  two,  three  or  four  drugs  of  the  same  medicinal group,  or  a  similar  number  of  drugs  chosen  from  the the  different  groups,  or  a  group  of  medicinal  drugs  in  its entirety,  or  in  combination  with  another,  should  be used  according  to  the  indications  of  any  particular  case, as  the  physician,  in  his  discretion,  would  determine.
*  Additional  Text  : — These  drugs  may  be  duly  culled  in  all  seasons  of the  year,  and  should  be  stored  in  a  room  protected  from  smoke,  blasts  of cold,  wind  and  rain.
Thus  ends  the  thirty-eighth  Chapter  of  the  Sutrasth^nam  in  the  Sushruta Samhit5,  which  deals  with  the  classification  of  drugs  according  to  their therapeutical  use.
CHAPTER    XXXIX.
Xow  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which  treats of  medicinal  drugs  possessed  of  cleansing  (cathartic') or  soothing  effects  (Samshodhana-Samsha- maniya-madhyaryam).
Emetic  Drugs  : — The  drugs  known  as Madana  fruits,  Kutaja,  Jimutaka,  Ikshvaku,  Dhamagarba, Krita-vedhana,  Sarshapa,  Vidanga,  Pippali,  Karan- jaka,  Prapunnada,  Kovidara,  Korvudara,  Arishta,  Ashva- gandha,  Vidula,  Vandhujivaka,  Shveta,  Shanapushpi, Vimvi,  Vacha,  Mrigervaru  and  Chitra,  etc.  are  possessed of  emetic  properties.  Out  of  these  the  fruits  (seeds)  of plants  preceding  Kovidara  in  the  abovesaid  list (from  the  ]\Iadana  fruits  to  those  of  the  Prapunnada) and  the  roots  of  plants  from  Kovidara  to  its  close, should  be  used.
Purgative  Drugs  :— The  trees,  plants,  herbs and  creepers,  etc.  known  as  Trivrita,  Shyama,  Danti, Dravanti,  Saptala,  Shankhini,  Vishanika,  Gavakshi, Chhagalantri,  Snuk,  Suvarnakshiri,  Chitraka,  Kinihi, Kusha,  Kasha,  Tilvaka,  Kampillaka,  Ranwaka,  Patala, Puga,  Haritaki,  Amalaka,  Bibhitaka,  Xilini,  Chatur- angula,  Eranda,  Putika,  Mah^vriksha,  Saptachchhada, Arka,  and  J3''otishmati,  etc.  are  possessed  of  purgative properties.   Of  these  the  roots  of  plants,  which  precede
Chap.  XXXIX.]         StJTRASTHANAM.
359
Tilvaka  in  the  above  list,  should  be  used  for  purgative purposes.  The  barks  of  trees  from  Tilvaka  to  Patala in  the  same  list  should  be  used  for  similar  purposes. The  pollens  or  dust  of  the  Kampilla  seeds,  and  of  the fruits  of  trees  from  Eranda  to  Puga,  the  leaves  of Putika  and  Aragvadha.  and  the  milky  exudations  of  the remaining  members  of  the  list,  should  be  similarly  used.
The  expressed  juice  of  Koshataki,  Saptala,  Shankhini, Devadali,  or  Karavellika  is  both  emetic  and  purgative.
The  Errhincs  :— The  following  drugs,  viz. Pippali,  Vidanga,  Apamarga,  Shigru,  Siddharthaka, Shirisha,  Maricha,  Karavira,  Vimvi,  Girikarnika,  Kinihi, Vacha,  Jyotishmati,  Karanja,  Arka,  Alarka,  Lashuna, Ativisha,  Shringavera,  Talisha,  Tamala,  Surasa,  Arjaka, Ingudi,  Meshashringi,  Matulungi,  Murangi,  Pilu,  Jati, Shala,  Tala,  Madhuka  (Maula),  Laksha  and  Hingu, together  with  such  substances  as  rock-salt,  spirits, cow's  urine  and  watery  exudation  of  cow  dung should  be  regarded  as  errhines  (Shirovirechanam  . The  fruits  (seeds)  of  plants  from  Pippali  to  Maricha enumerated  in  the  above-said  list,  the  roots  of  plants commencing  with  Karavira  and  ending  with  Arka,  the bulbs  of  those  whose  names  precede  Talisha  in  the same  list,  the  leaves  of  those  commencing  with  Talisha and  ending  with  the  Arjaka  therein,  the  barks  of Ingudi  and  Meshashringi,  the  flowers  of  Matulungi, Murungi,  Pilu  and  Jati,  the  essence  (Sara)  of  Shala,  Tala
360  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap,  xxxix.
and  Maduhka  (Maul)  trees,  the  gummy  exudation (Niryasa)  of  Hingu  plants  and  Laksha  trees,  as  well  as salts  which  are  but  the  saline  modifications  of  earth, Madya  (wines)  which  are  but  the  modified  products  of Asava  (fermented  liquors),  and  secretions  of  cowdung,  or cow's  urine  which  should  be  understood  to  mean  the animal  excrements,  in  their  crude  or  natural  state,  should be  used  where  errhines  are  indicated.
Samshamaniya  Drugs  :— Now  we  shall enumerate  the  names  of  drugs  and  substances  which soothe  or  pacify  the  deranged  humours  or  principles of  the  body  involved  in  any  particular  disease (Sanshamanani\
Va'ta-Samshamana-Varga:— The  follow- ing drugs,  viz.  Bhadradaru,  Kustha,  Haridra,  Varuna, Meshshringi,  Vala,  Ativala,  Artagala,  Kachhura,  Sallaki, Kuverakshi,  Virataru,  Sahachara,  Agnimantha,  Vatsa- dani,  Eranda,  Ashmabhedaka,  Alarka,  Arka,  Shata- vari,  Punarnava,  Vasuka,  Vasira.  Kanchanaka,  Bhargi, Karpasi,  Vrishchiaali,  Pattura,  Vadara,  Yava,  Kola, Kulattha,  etc.  and  the  drugs  forming  the  group  of  Vidari- gandhadi-Gana,  as  well  as  those  belonging  to  the  first two  groups  of  Panchamula  (Mahat  and  Svalpa),  are possessed  of  the  general  virtue  of  soothing  (restoring  to its  normal  state)  the  deranged  (Vaym  Vata.
Pitta-Samshamana-Varga  —The  drugs known    as  Chandana,  Kuchandana,   Hrivera,   Ushira,
Chap.  XXXIX.]  StiTRASTHANAM.  361
Manjishtha,  Payasya,  Vidari,  Shatavari,  Guiidra, Shaivala,  Kahlara,  Kiimuda,  Utpala,  Kadali,  Kandali^ Durva,  Miirva,  etc.  and  the  drugs  forming  the  groups of  Kakolyadi,  Sarivadi,  Anjaiiadi,  Utpaladi,  Nyagro- dhadi,  and  Trina-Panchamula  groups  generally  prOve soothing  to  the  deranged  Pittam.
Shicshma'- Samshamana- Varga  :—
The  drugs  known  as  Kaleyaka,  Aguru,  Tilaparni, Kushtha,  Haridra,  Shitashiva,  Shatapushpa,  Sarala, Rasna,  Prakiryya,  Udakiryya,  Ingudi,  Sumanah, Kakadani,  Langalaki,  Hastikarna,  Munjataka,  Lama- jjaka,  etc.  and  the  drugs  belonging  to  the  groups  of Valli  and  Kantak  Panchamulas  and  those  composing the  Pippalyadi-Varga,  Brihatyadi-Varga,  Mushkadi- Varga,  Vachadi,  Surasadi  and  Aragvadhadi  groups are  generally  possessed  of  the  efficacy  of  restoring the  deranged  Shleshma  to  its  natural  state.
The  choice  of  a  medicine  whether  for  cleansing or  soothing  purposes  should  be  determined  by  the consideration  of  the  strength  (intensity)  of  the  disease, and  the  stamina  and  the  digestive  function  of  the patient  under  treatment.  A  medicine  (of  a  soothing or  Samshamanam  efficacy),  which  is  stronger  than the  disease  it  has  been  applied  to  combat  with, not  only  checks  it  with  its  own  soothing  virtue  but usually  gives  rise  to  a  fresh  malady,  on  account  of its     surplus     energy     being     not     requisitioned     into
46
362
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XXXIX.
action,  nor  its  being  used  up  by  the  weakened  and conquered  origuial  distemper.  It  is  thus  stored  up  in the  organism  for  the  working  of  fresh  mischief.  A medicine,  which  proves  stronger  than  the  digestive function  of  a  patient,  impairs  his  digestion,  or  takes an  unusually  greater  length  of  time  to  be  digested and  assimilated  into  his  organism.  A  medicine,  which is  stronger  than  the  physical  stamina  of  a  patient,  may bring  on  a  feeling  of  physical  languor,  fits  of  fainting, loss  of  consciousness,  delirium,  etc.  Similarly,  an  over- dose of  a  cleansing  (cathartic)  medicine  .may  work similar  mischief.  On  the  other  hand,  medicines  of inadequate  potencies,  and  accordingly  unequal  to  the strength  of  a  disease,  as  well  as  medicines  in  in- adequate doses  fail  to  produce  any  tangible  effect. Hence  medicines  of  adequate  potencies  should  be  alone administered  in  adequate  doses.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject :^A  prudent  physician  should  prescribe  a  mild purgative  for  a  patient  enfeebled  by  the  action  of  the deranged  and  accumulated  bodily  humours  and  laid up  with  a  disease  in  which  such  a  cleansing  (cathartic) or  emetic  remedy  is  indicated.  The  same  rule  should hold  good  in  the  case  of  a  patient  enfeebled  through causes  other  than  physical  distempers,  and  whose bowels  are  easily  moved,  and  in  whom  the fecal   matter,  etc.   are   found  to   have   been  dislodged
Chap.  XXXIX.]  SUTI^ASTHANAM.  363
from  their  natural  seats  or  locations.  Decoctions (including  extracts  and  cold  infusions  of  medicinal herbs)  in  doses  of  four  Palas  weights,  and  pastes  and powders  in  doses  of  two  Palas  weights,  should  be prescribed  in  a  disease  of  ordinary  intensit}'.  Corrective medicines  (Purgatives  and  lilmetics)  may  be  safely exhibited  even  in  a  weak  patient  with  loose  or  uncon- stipated  bowels,  if  they  are  found  to  be  stuffed  with  a spontaneous  accumulation  of  fecal  matter  (Dosha)  etc. inspite  of  such  looseness  or  easy  motion.
Thus  ends  ihe  thiity-ninlh  Chapter  of  the  Sutrasth^nam  in  the  Sushiuta SamhitS,  which  treats  of  drugs  of  cleansing  (corrective)  and  soothing properties.
CHAPTER     XL.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which treats  of  drugs  and  their  flavours,  virtues,  potencies and  chemical  actions.  (Dravya-Rasa-Guna- Virya-Vipa'ka-Vijnaniya-madhya'yam).
Certain  professors  of  the  Aj'urveda  hold  that  a medicinal  drug  or  substance  is  pre-eminently  the  most important  niatter  with  which  the  science  of  medicine  is concerned.  First  because,  a  drug,  as  a  substance,  has  a definite  and  continuous  existence/ which  its  attributes (such  as,  taste,  etc.,)  do  not  possess.  As  for  example the  tastes,  etc.,  which  characterise  a  fruit  in  its  unripe stage,  are  not  perceived  in  its  ripe  or  matured  condition. Secondly  because,  a  drug  is  real  (Xitya)  and  invariable, whereas  its  attributes  are  but  transitory  and  accidental at  the  best.  As  for  instance  the  real  character  of  a drug  cannot  be  destroyed  whether  it  be  powdered or  pasted.  Thirdly  because,  a  drug  or  a  substance  never can  lose  its  own  generic  character.  As  for  example, a  drug  possessed  of  attributes  peculiar  to  the  fun- damental matter,  earth,  can  never  be  transformed into  one  of  watery  attributes — a  truth  which  does not  hold  good  of  its  attributes.  Fourthly  because, a  drug  or  a  substance  is  an  object  of  all  the  five senses  of  a  man,   whereas  its  attributes  of  tastes,  etc.
Chap.  XL.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^5^
are  respectively  accommodated  to  the  faculty  of special  sense  organs.  Fifthly  because,  a  drug  or  a substance  is  the  receptacle  of  the  attributes  of  taste,  etc., whilethe  latter  are  the  things  contained.  Sixthly  because, a  dictum  of  medicine  can  be  commenced  with  the  name of  a  drug  or  substance.  As  for  example,  it  is  quite natural  to  say  that  the  drugs  such  as  Vidari  Gandha,etc., should  be  pressed  and  boiled.  But  it  sounds  preposterous to  utter  that  the  sweet  taste  should  be  pulverised  and boiled.  Seventhl)'  because,  the  greater  importance  of a  drug  or  substance  has  been  laid  down  in  the  Shastras of  medicines  inasmuch  as  medical  recipes  have  been described  by  the  names  of  their  component  ingredients such  as  Matulunga,  Agnimantha,  etc.,  and  not described  as  the  tastes  of  Matulunga,  Agnimantha  etc. Eighth!}'  because,  the  attributes  of  tastes,  etc.,  depend upon  the  drugs  and  substances  (of  which  they  are  the attributes)  for  their  progressive  maturity.  As  for example,  the  taste  of  a  drug  or  substance  varies  with its  growth  and  is  different  in  its  raw  (immature)  and ripe  (mature)  conditions.  (Hence  a  drug  is  more  im- portant than  its  attributes  of  taste,  etc.)  Ninthly because,  a  drug  may  prove  curative  through  the  eflicacy of  one  of  its  component  parts  or  principles  as  in  the case  of  Mahavriksha,  the  milky  exudations  of  which are  possessed  of  therapeutical  virtues,  which  cannot be  said  of  its  taste.
Hence  a  drug  or  a  substance  (Dravyam)  is  the  most
366  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [  Chap.  XL.
important  factor  (which  the  science  of  medicine  has  got to  deal  with).  A  substance  or  drug  necessarily  implies action  and  attributes  with  which  it  is  intimately  con- nected and  of  which  it  is  the  primary  cause,  or  to  put  it more  explicitly,  these  attributes  have  an  inseparable inherence  in  and  are  intimately  associated  with  the substance  by  way  of  cause  and  effect  (Samavayi- Karanam).
Others,  on  the  contrary,  who  do  not  endorse the  above  opinion,  accord  the  highest  importance  to the  attribute  of  taste  (Rasa)  of  a  drug  or  sub- stance. Firstly  because,  it  is  so  laid  down  in  the Agamas  (Vedas),  which  include  the  science  of  medicine (Ayurveda  Shastram)  as  well,  and  inasmuch  as  such statements  as  "  Food  is  primarily  contingent  on  its tastes  and  on  food  depends  life "  occur  therein. Secondly  because,  the  essential  importance  of  taste may  be  inferred  from  such  injunctions  or  instructions of  the  professors  of  medicine  as,  "  sweet,  acid  and saline  tastes  soothe  or  pacify  the  deranged  bodily  Vayu." Thirdly  because,  a  drug  or  a  substance  is  named  after the  nature  of  its  taste,  as  a  sweet  drug,  a  saline  sub- tance,  etc.  Fourthly  because,  its  primary  importance is  based  on  the  inspired  utterances  of  the  holy  sages (Rishis)  which  form  the  sacred  hymns  and  verses  of  the Vedas,  and  such  passages  as  "  sweets  to  be  collected  for the  purposes  of  a   religious  sacrifice,"   etc,  are  to  be
Chap.  XL.  ]  StJTRASTHANAM.  367
found  in  them.  Hence  taste  is  the  most  important factor  in  the  science  of  medicine  and  forms  the  primary attribute  of  a  medicinal  drug.  But,  later  on,  we  shall have  occasion  to  speak  of  that.
•
Certain  authorities  however,  (who  reject  the  two aforesaid  theories),  hold  the  potency  (Viryam)  of  a drug  to  be  the  most  important  factor  in  medicine  inas- much as  its  therapeutic  action,  whether  purgative, emetic,  or  both,  or  cathartic,  or  pacifying,  or  astrin- gent, appetising,  pressing  (drawing  to  a  definite  head) or  liquefacient,  or  constructive,  tonic  (vitalising) or  aphrodisiac,  or  inflammatory,  absorbing,  caustic, or  bursting,  or  intoxicating,  soporific,  killing  or  antitoxic, depends  upon  its  potency.  The  potency  of  a  drug is  either  cooling  or  heat-making  owing  to  the  two- fold (hot  and  cool)  nature  of  the  temperament  of the  world.  According  to  several  authorities  the potency  of  a  medicinal  drug  may  be  classed  as  either hot  or  cool,  emollient  or  dr}-,  expansive  or  slimy, mild  or  keen,  so  as  to  embrace  the  eight  differ- ent attributes  in  all.  These  potencies  of  medicinal  drugs serve  their  respective  functions  by  overpowering their  (drugs')  tastes  with  their  specific  strength  (inten- sity) and  virtues.  As  for  example  the  decoction  of the  roots  belonging  to  the  group  of  the  Maha- Panchamulam,  though  possessed  of  an  astringent taste   which   is   subsequently   transformed  into  a  bitter
368  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHiTA.  [Chap.  XL.
one,  acquires  the  virtue  of  pacifying  the  deranged Vayu  out  of  its  heat-making  potenc3^  Similarly,  the pulse  known  as  Kulattha  though  possessed  of an  astringent  taste,  and  onion  though  endued  with a  ,  pungent  one,  respectively  soothe  the  same deranged  humour  of  the  body  through  the  oleaginous character  of  their  potencies.  On  the  other  hand, the  expressed  juice  of  sugar-cane,  though  possessed  of a  sweet  taste,  tends  to  augment  or  aggravate  the deranged  Vayu  owing  to  its  cooling  potency.  The drug  Pippali,  though  a  pungent  substance  in  itself, proves  soothing  to  the  deranged  Pittam,  owing  to  its mild  and  cooling  potenc}'.  Similarly,  an  Amalakam fruit,  though  acid  in  taste,  and  Saindhava,  though  saline, respectively  tend  to  pacify  the  deranged  Pittam. The  drug  Kakamachi,  though  of  a  bitter  taste,  and fish,  though  sweet,  respectively  aggravate  the  Pittam, owing  to  their  thermogenetic  potency.  Similarly, Mulakam  (Radish),  though  pungent,  increases  the Kapham  of  the  body,  on  account  of  its  emollient potency  ;  and  Kapittham,  though  acid,  soothes  ;  and honey,  though  sweet,  tends  to  pacify  the  deranged Kapham  owing  to  the  dry  character  of  its  potency. The  aforesaid  instances  have  been  cited  by  way  of illustration.
Authoritative    verses  on   the   sub- ject : — Tastes,  which  are  possessed  of  dry,  light  or
Chap.  XL.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
369
expansive  potencies,  fail  to  pacify  the  deranged  Vayii, though  otherwise  they  may  prove  soothing  to  that deranged  humour.  Similarly,  tastes,  which  are  or- dinarily reckoned  as  pacifiers  of  the  deranged  Pittam, fail  to  produce  that  effect  in  the  event  of  their  being endued  with  a  keen,  light  or  heat- making  potency. Likewise,  tastes,  which  are  commonl}'  found  to  soothe the  deranged  Kapham,  tend  to  aggravate  it  in  the event  of  their  being  possessed  of  potencies  which are  respectively  heavy,  cool  and  emollient  in  their character.*  Hence  the  potency  of  a  drug  is  the  most important  factor  in  the  science  of  medicine.
But  certain  authorities  dissent  from  the  above-said view,  and  attach  the  highest  importance  to  the  process of  digestive  (chemical)  reaction  (Vipaka)  for  the reason,  that  all  ingested  food,  properly  or  improperly digested  in  the  stomach,  proves  wholesome  or  other- wise to  the  body.  Certain  authorities  on  the  subject hold  that  digestion  develops  all  the  several  tastes. t
According  to  others,  tastes  such  as,  sweet, pungent  and  acid,  follow  upon  the  completion  of the  process  of  digestion  (b}^  way  of  reactionary  result or  transformation).
*  Flavours  such  as,  sweet,  acid  and  saline,  subdue  the  deranged  \"5yu. Tastes  such  as,  sweet,  bitter  and  astringent  are  antiljilious  in  their  efficacy, while  those,  which  are  pungent,  bitter  and  astringent,  are  antiphlegmagogic in  their  virtues.
t  The  process  of  digestion  is  followed  by  a  reactionary  taste,  which  may be  either  sweet,  pungent,  acid,  astringent,  bitter  or  saline.
47
370
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [  Chap.  XL.
It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  hypothesis  is  based on  erroneous  data,  inasmuch  as  the  fact  of  acid digestion  (acid  taste  developed  at  the  close  of  the digestive  process  or  reactionary  acidity)  is  contrary both  to  the  properties  of  matter  and  the  collective  ex- perience of  the  race  embodied  in  the  dictum  of  the Shastras,  and  which  should  be  rather  ascribed  to  the acid  taste  of  the  Pittam  remaining  in  an  undigested or  unassimilated  condition  owing  to  imperfect  gastric digestion.  The  probability  of  a  saline  digestion  (a reactionary  saline  taste  following  upon  the  close  of the  digestive  process)  should  be  necessarily  presumed, if  the  fact  of  an  acid  digestion  were  to  be  upheld as  a  tested  and  corroborated  principle  of  medical science.  The  hypothesis  of  an  acid  digestion  (re- actionary acidity)  does  not  preclude  the  possibility  of a  similar  saline  one  owing  to  the  participation  of the  natural  taste  (saline)  of  the  bodily  Kapham  in the  process  of  digestion,  as  is  said  of  Pittam  in  the preceding  instance.  Hence  the  theory  that  only  three tastes,  such  as  sweet,  acid,  and  pungent  are  developed through  digestive  reaction,  appears  to  be  untenable,  and naturally  points  to  the  doctrine  that  a  sweet  taste (partaken  of  by  a  man)  brings  on  a  sweet  tasted digestion  ;  an  acid  taste  (reactionary  acidit}')  begets acid  digestion,  and  so  on,  a  taste  of  whatsoever  kind partaken  of  by  a  man  imparting  its  specific  character  to his  digestive  reaction.
Chap.  XL.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  37 j
Those,  who  adhere  to  the  last  named  doctrine, endeavourto  substantiate  it  by  the  following  analogy,  and argue  that  as  milk  kept  boiling  in  a  basin  placed  over  a fire  does  not  change  its  natural  sweetness  (with  the change  of  its  temperature),  as  cereals  such  as  Shali- rice,  wheat,  barley,  Mudga,  etc.  sown  broadcast  in the  ground  do  not  part  with  their  inherent,  generic attributes  (through  their  successive  stages  of  develop- ment), so  the  tastes  of  food-stuff  do  not  alter even  after  being  boiled  in  the  heat  of  the  digestive organs.
Others,  on  the  contrary,  assert  that  weak  tastes are  naturally  merged  in  the  strong  ones  in  the  course of  digestion.  And  since  the  consensus  of  expert opinions  on  the  subject  serves  only  to  increase the  confusion  on  account  of  their  differences  and bigoted  antipathy,  we  shall  judiciously  refrain  from indulging  in  idle  theories  on  the  subject.
Only  two  kinds  of  digestion  (digestive  reactionary tastes)  have  been  noticed  in  the  Shastras,  such  as, the  sweet  and  the  pungent,  the  first  being  heavy and  the  second  light.  The  specific  properties  of the  five  essential  material  principles  of  the  world  such as,  the  earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  sky  may  be  roughly described  as  heaviness  and  lightness,  the  two  attri- butes which  appertain  to  their  fundamental  natures. Heaviness  forms  the  characteristic  attribute  of  earth
372  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [Chap.  XL.
and   water,    while   lightness   stands   for  the    essential
properties  of  fire,   air   and   sky.     Hence  the   digestion
of  all   food-stuff  may   be   described    as  either   heavy (Guru)  or  light  (Laghu).
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject :— Of  substances  under  the  process  of  digestion, those,  which  are  characterised  by  attributes,  specifi- cally belonging  to  earth  and  water,  are  called substances  of  sweet  (heavy)  digestion  ;  while  those which  are  permeated  with  the  specific  properties  of air,  fire  and  sky  are  called  substances  of  pungent (lightj  digestion  (easily  digestible  articles  of  food). We  have  fulh^  stated  the  text  of  the  controversy as  regards  the  primary  importance  of  drugs  and their  tastes,  virtues,  potencies  and  digestive  reactions, as  well  as  the  views  of  those  who  build  their  theories on  the  separate  or  exclusive  importance  of  any  of the  five  afore-said  factors.  The  wise  and  the  erudite set  an  equal  importance  to  each  of  them,  and  ascribe the  curative  efficacy  of  a  medicine  to  the  co-opera- tion of  all  these  five  factors.  A  drug  ot  a  sub- stance sometimes  destroys  or  originates  a  deranged condition  of  the  humours  through  the  dynamical action  of  its  native  or  inherent  properties,  sometimes in  virtue  of  its  specific  potency  and  sometimes  by natural  taste  or  digestive  (chemical)  reaction.  Digestive reaction  is  impossible  without   drug   potency.     There  is
Chap.  XL.  J  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  373
no  potency  without  a  taste,  and  taste  without  a  drug or  substance  is  an  absurdity.-  Hence  a  substance  (vegeta- ble or  otherwise)  is  the  greatest  of  them  all.  A  taste  and a  substance  are  correlative  categories  from  the  time of  their  origin,  like  a  body  and  an  embodied self  in  the  plane  of  organic  existence.  Since  an attribute  per  se  can  not  be  possessed  of  another  attri- bute, the  eight  kinds  of  potency  (properties)  can only  appertain  to  a  substance  and  not  to  a  taste, which  is  an  attribute  in  itself.  Substances  are  digested in  an  organic  body  and  not  the  six  tastes  simply for  the  reason  of  their  being  invisible  and  intangible in  themselves.  Hence  a  substance  is  the  greatest  of all  tlie  aforesaid  five  factors  (of  substance,  taste, virtues,  etc.)  and  the  attributes  lie  inherent  in  the substance.
Unscrutable  and  unthinkable  are  the  virtues  of drugs  (medicines),  which  are  above  all  rules  of syllogism  ;  and  hence  drugs  (medicines),  which  have been  observed  to  be  efficacious  from  time  immemorial, as  well  as  those  laid  down  in  the  scriptures  on medicines,  should  alone  be  used  in  the  course  of  a medical  treatment.  A  learned  physician  should  think it  a  sacrilege  to  logically  dispute  the  efficacy  of  a medicine  of  tested  virtue,  and  which  has  been  adopted after  generations  of  careful  observation  and  is  instinc- tively pronounced  b}-^   men   as   a    beneficial    remedy.
;74
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [  Chap.  XL.
No  amount  of  logic  will  alter  the  nature  of  things, nor  persuade  the  drugs  of  the  Amboshtha  group  to exercise  a  purgative  virtue.  Hence  an  intelligerrt  physi- cian should  adhere  to  the  officinal  recipes  given  in  the books  on  medicine,  and  not  introduce  innovations, however  logical  or  probable,  into  the  realms  of applied  or  practical  Therapeutics.
Thus  ends  the  fortieth  Chapter  of  the  Sutrasthinam  in  the  Sushruta SamhitS,  which  deals  with  drugs  and  their  flavours,  virtues,  and  digestive (chemical)  transformation.
CHAPTER    XLI.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which treats  of  the  specific  properties  of  drugs  (Dravya- Vishcsha-Vijna'niya-madhya'yam).
The  five  fundamental  principles*  such  as  the  earth (Kshithi),  water  (Apa),  fire  (Teja),  air  (Marut)  and  Sky (Vyoraa)  enter  into  the  composition  of  all  substances in  the  world,  and  the  predominance  of  any  of  them  in a  particular  substance  determines  its  character. Accordingly  a  thing  is  denominated  as  a  substance  of dominant  earth  principle,  or  one  marked  by  a  pre- dominance of  fire,  air  or  ether.
Parrthiva  Drugs  : — A  thing  or  substance, which  is  thick,  pithy,  compact,  dull,  immobile,  rough, heavy  (hard  to  digest^  strong  smelling  and  largely  has a  sweet  taste  marked  by  a  shade  of  astringent,  is  called a  substance  of  dominant  earth  (Parthivam)  matter. •  Such  a  thing  increases  the  firmness,  strength,  hardness and  rotundity  of  the  human  body,  and  is  possessed  of gravity  (the  virtue  of  moving  the  bowels).
A'pyam  Drugs  :— Similarly,  a  thing  or  subs- tance, which  is  cold,  moist,  glossy,  devoid  of  keenness, takes  time   to   be   digested,   is  mobile,   compact,  soft,
*     These  may  be  translated  as  Solid,  Liquid,  Gas,  Ether,  and  Etherioil in  the  parlance  of  modern  science.
376  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [  Chap.  XLI.
slimy,  sappy,  and  is  largely  endued  with  an  acid,  saline or  sweet  taste  marked  by  a  shade  of  astringent,  is  called a  substance  of  dominant  water  (Apyam'i  principle. Such  a  thing  soothes  and  imparts  a  glossy  character  to th2  body,  keeps  it  moist,  favours  the  adhesion  of  its parts,  and  increases  its  liquid  contents.
Taijasam  Drugs  :— A  thing  or  substance, which  is  heat-making,  pungent  and  keen,  subtle  in its  essence,  permeates  the  minutest  capillaries,  and  is  dry, rough,  light,  and  non-slimy  in  its  character  and  has  strong properties  and  a  taste  which  is  largely  pungent  marked  by a  shade  of  saline,  is  called  a  substance  of  the  dominant principle  of  fire  (Taijasam).  Such  a  thing  naturally evinces  an  up-coursing  tendency  in  the  body,  produces a  burning  sensation  in  its  inside,  helps  the  process  of digestion  and  spontaneous  bursting  (of  abscesses), increases  the  temperature  of  the  body,  strengthens  the eyesight,  improves  the  complexion  and  imparts  a healthful  glow  to  it.
Varyaviyam  Drugs  :— A  thing  or  substance, which  is  subtle  in  its  essence,  and  is  dry,  rough,  light, cold  and  non- slimy,  increases  tactual  sensation  and is  endued  with  a  largely  astringent  taste  marked  by  a shade  of  bitter,  is  called  a  substance  of  the  dominant principle  of  air  ( Vayaviyam).  Such  a  thing  removes  the slimy  character  of  the  internal  organism,  produces  light-
Chap.-XLI.  J  SUTRASTHANAM.  377
ness,  diyness  and  emaciation  of  the  body,  and  increases the  speculative  or  contemplative  faculty  of  the  mind.
Aka'shiyam  Drugs  :— A  thing  or  sub stance,  which  is  smooth,  unctuous,  and  is  subtle  in its  nature,  soft  or  pliant  in  its  consistency,  expansive  'in the  internal  organism),  porous,  soundy  and  non- slimy in  its  character  without  any  definite  taste,  is  called a  substance  of  the  dominant  principle  of  sky (Akashiyam).  Such  a  substance  produces  softness,  light- ness and  porosity  of  the  body.
It  may  be  inferred  from  the  foregoing  illustrations that  there  is  not  a  single  substance  in  the  world  but  is endued  with  certain  curative  virtues.  Drugs  or substances,  used  in  specific  combinations  and  according to  the  indications  of  a  disease  under  treatment,  prove curative  in  virtue  of  their  native  virtues  and  potencies. The  time,  during  which  a  drug  or  a  medicine  exerts  its curative  virtues,  is  called  its  Kala  or  the  period  of action.  That  which  immediately  results  from  the  use  or application  of  a  medicinal  remedy  is  called  its  Karma or  physiological  action.  The  principle,  in  virtue  of  which the  action  is  performed,  is  called  its  potenc)'  or  Viryam. That,  in  which  the  action  takes  place,  is  called  its receptacle  or  Adhikaranam.  The  means  by  which  it  is effected  is  called  its  agency  or  Upaya,  while  that  what it  accomplishes  is  called  its  therapeutic  effect  or  Phalam.
Of  these  the  drugs  of  purgative  virtue  are  possessed 48
378  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.XLi.
of  attiibutes  which  specifically  belong  to  the  earth and  water.  Earth  and  water  are  heavy,  and  natur- ally gravitate  downward  owing  to  their  heaviness. Hence  it  is  inferred  that  purgative  drugs  are  largely endued  with  the  specific  attributes  of  earth  and  water, in  virtue  of  which  they  are  more  strongly  attracted towards  the  centre  of  the  earth  (gravity).  Drugs  endued with  emetic  properties  are  possessed  of  attributes  which form  the  characteristics  of  fire  and  air.  Fire  and  air are  light,  and  naturally  ascend  upward  owing  to  their lightness.  Hence  it  is  inferred,  that  emetic  (Vamana) drugs  are  largely  possessed  of  attributes,  which  are upcoursing  in  their  nature.  Drugs  or  substances  endued with  both  emetic  and  purgative  virtues  are  charac- terised by  attributes  belonging  to  both  the  aforesaid elements  (earth  and  fire).
Drugs,  which  soothe  the  deranged  bodily  humours, are  permeated  with,  qualities  which  specifically  belong to  the  principle  of  the  sky.  Astringent  (Sangrahaka) drugs  are  endued  with  attributes,  which  specifically belong  to  the  air  owing  to  the  drying  character  of  the latter  element.  Appetising  (Dipana)  drugs  are  largely possessed  of  attributes  which  belong  to  the  material principle  of  fire.  Lekhana  (Liquefacient)  drugs  or  sub- stances are  endued  with  attributes  which  belong  to  fire and  air.  Constructive  or  restorative  (Vringhanam)  drugs or  substances  are  endued  with   attributes   which  speci-
Chap.  XLI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  279
fically  belong  to  earth  and  water.  These  inferences should  be  carefully  remembered  at  the  time  of  pre- scribing medicines.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject ; — The  deranged  bodily  Vayu  readily  yields  to  the curative  efficacies  of  drugs  possessed  of  attributes, specifically  belonging  to  the  earth,  fire  and  water,  while the  deranged  Pittam  is  speedily  soothed  or  restored  to its  normal  state  by  drugs  having  attributes,  specifically belonging  to  the  earth,  water  and  air.  Similarly,  the deranged  Kapham  is  pacified  by  drugs  possessed  of attributes  which  characterise  the  sky,  fire  and  air.
The  bodily  Vayu  is  increased  by  the  use  of  drugs possessed  of  attributes  which  specifically  belong  to  the sky  and  air,  while  the  Pittam  is  increased  by  the  use of  those  which  are  largely  endued  with  the  specific attributes  of  fire.  The  bodily  Kapham  of  the  body is  increased  by  the  use  of  drugs  which  are  largely endued  with  the  specific  attributes  of  the  earth and  water.  Thus  having  ascertained  the  dominant attributes  of  drugs,  a  physician  should  use  them  for  the pacification  of  two  or  more  of  the  deranged  humours  of the  body  according  to  the  exigencies  of  a  case.
Of  the  eight-fold  potencies  of  a  drug,  such  as cooling,  thermogenetic,  oleaginous,  heavy,  parchifying, plastive,  keen  and  slimy,  keenness  and  thermogenetic
38o
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.         [  Chap.  XLI.
potency  should  be  ascribed  to  the  attributes  of fire  ;  coohng  potenc)-  and  that  of  engendering  slime, to  the  predominance  of  the  attributes  of  water  in  a drug  or  substance  ;  oleaginousness,  to  the  predominance of  the  attributes  of  the  earth  and  water ;  plastive  potenc)^, to  the  predominance  of  the  attributes  of  water  and  the sky  ;  parchifying  potency,  to  the  excess  of  the  attributes of  air  ;  non-slimy  potency  (Vaishadyam),  to  the  predo- minance of  the  attributes  of  earth  and  air  ;  and  heavy and  light  digestion,  to  the  same  cause.
Of  these,  oiliness  and  thermogenetic  potency  prove curative  in  respect  of  the  deranged  Vayu,  while  cooling potency,  plastive  potency,  and  that  of  engendering  slime subdue  the  deranged  Pittam.  Keenness,  parchifying  and non-slimy  potencies  conquer  the  deranged  Kapham. Substances,  which  are  hea^y  in  digestion,  destroy  the deranged  Vayu  and  Pittam,  while  those  which  are  light in  digestion  (easily  digestible  substances)  prove  curative in  respect  of  the  deranged  Kapham.
Of  these,  softness,  coldness  and  heat  ma)?^  be  per- ceived by  touch.  The  properties  of  sliminess  and  its opposite  may  be  perceived  by  the  eyes  and  touch. The  properties  of  dr3mess  and  oiliness  of  a  drug may  be  perceived  with  the  eyes  ;  keenness  of  a  drug from  the  fact  of  its  producing  pain  in  the  mouth  ;  and [heat  and  cold,  by  the  sensation  of  comfort  (pleasure)  or discomfort— A.  Text]     The  fact  of  heavy  (insufficient)
Chap.XLL]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  381
digestion  should  be  inferred  from  the  frequent passing  of  stool  and  urine,  •  as  well  as  from  the  expec- toration of  Kapham,  while  the  contrary  should  be presumed  from  the  constipation  of  the  bowels,  retention -of  urine  and  disorders  of  the  abdominal  Va}^!  (flatulence, distension  of  the  abdomen^  etc.).  A  specific  taste  is detected  in  material  principles  of  similar  properties. As  for  example,  a  drug  or  a  substance,  which  is  heavy and  endued  with  a  sweet  taste,  should  be  deemed  as belonging  to  the  group  of  the  earthy  matter  (largely possessed  of  attributes  characterising  earth-matter). Similarly,  a  substance,  which  is  sweet  and  oily  in  its character,  should  be  regarded  as  belonging  to  one  in which  the  principle  of  water  predominates.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — Properties,  which  characterise  drugs  and substances,  may  be  as  well  found  in  a  human  organism, and  the  normal  continuance,  aggravation  or  dimi- nution of  the  deranged  humours  is  due  to  the  action of  the  drugs  (substances).
Thus  ends  the  forty-first  Chapter  of  the    Sutrasth^nam   in   the  Sushruta Samhiti  which  treats  of  specific  properties  of  drugs.
CHAPTER    XLII.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which  treats oi"  the  specific  properties  of  flavours  (Rasa- Vishcsha-Vljnariiya-maclhyaryam).
The  properties  of  sky  (Akasha),  air  (Pavana),  fire (Dahana),  water  (Toya)  and  earth  (Bhumi)  are  sound touch,  colour,  taste  and  smell,  each  of  the  preceding elements  possessing  properties  less  by  one  than  those of  the  one  immediately  succeeding  it  in  the  order  of enumeration.*
[Since  a  matter  is  designated  after  the  name  of the  preponderant  natural  element,  which  enters  into  its composition],  taste  is  said  to  be  a  water-origined  prin- ciple. All  material  elements  are  inseparably  connected with  one  another,  and  there  is  a  sort  of  interdependence among  them,  each  one  contributing  to  the  continuance of  the  other  and  jointly  entering,  to  a  more  or  less extent,  into  the  composition  of  all  material  substances. This  water-origined  flavour  (Rasa),  which  becoming  mo- dified through  its  contact  with  the   rest  of  the  material
*To  put  it  more  explicitly  the  property  of  sound  belongs  to  the  sky (Akdsha).  The'properties  of  sound  and  touch  appertain  to  the  air  (V^yu). The  properties  of  sound,  touch  and  colour  form  the  characteristics  of  Fire (Teja).  Sound,  touch,  colour  and  taste  form  the  specific  properties  of water  (Toya).  Sound,  touch,  colour,  taste  and  smell  mark  the  earth  matter (Bhumi)*
Chap.  XLII.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  383
elements,  admits  of  being  divided  into  six  different kinds,  such  as  sweet,  acid,  saline,  pungent,  bitter  and astringent.  These,  in  their  turn,  being  combined  with one  another,  give  rise  to  sixty- three  different  kinds. A  sweet  taste  is  largely  endued  with  attributes  whi{;h specifically  appertain  to  the  material  principles  of earth  and  water.  An  acid  taste  is  pre-eminenth'  possessed of  attributes,  which  belong  to  the  elementary  principles of  earth  and  fire.  A  sahne  taste  is  mostly  endued  with attributes  which  characterise  the  elements  of  water and  fire.  A  pungent  taste  is  largely  possessed  of attributes,  which  mark  the  elementary  principles  of air  and  fire.  The  specific  attributes  of  air  and  sky predominate  in  a  bitter  taste.  The  specific  properties of  earth  and  air  should  be  regarded  as  dominant  in  an astringent  taste.
Tastes  such  as  sweet,  acid  and  saline  are  endued with  the  virtues  of  subduing  Vayu.  Tastes  such  as sweet,  bitter  and  astringent  are  possessed  of  the  virtue of  subduing  the  deranged  Pittam.  Tastes  such  as pungent,  bitter  and  astringent  tend  to  subdue  the deranged  Kapham.
The  Vayu  is  a  self-origined  principle  in  the  human organism.  The  Pittam  owes  its  origin  to  the  bodily heat  (Agneya),  while  the  origin  of  Kapham  is  ascribed to  the  presence  of  watery  (Saumya)  principle  in  the body.    Tastes  such  as   sweet,   etc.   are   augmented   by
3^4
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XLII.
causes  in  which  they  have  their  origin,  and  prove soothing  or  pacifying  in  respect  of  causes  other  than those  which  produce  them.
According  to  certain  authorities,  there  are  only  two kinds  of  tastes,  owing  to  the  two- fold  (hot  and  cold) nature  of  the  temperament  of  the  world.  Of  these the  tastes  such  as  sweet,  bitter  and  astringent  are cold  in  their  properties,  while  the  pungent,  acid  and saline  ones  exercise  fiery  or  heat  making  virtues.  The tastes  such  as  sweet,  acid  and  saline  are  heavy  and emollient  in  their  character,  while  the  pungent, astringent  and  bitter  ones  are  dry  and  light.  The watery  (Saumya)  tastes  are  cold.  The  fiery  (Agne3'a) ones  are  hot.
Coldness,  dryness,  lightness,  non-sliminess,  suppress- ion (of  the  urine  or  ordure)  form  the  characterstic properties  of  the  Vayu.  An  astringent  taste  should  be considered  as  possessed  of  the  same  properties  as  the Vayu,  and  hence  it  (astringent  taste)  increases  the coldness,  dryness,  lightness,  non-sliminess  and  arres- tiveness  of  the  latter  with  its  specific  coolness,  dryness, lightness,  non-sliminess  and  arrestiveness.
Heat,  pungency,  dryness,  lightness,  and  non-slimi- ness form  the  specific  properties  of  the  Pittam.  A  pun- gent taste,  which  is  possessed  of  the  same  properties  as the  Pittam,   respectively   increases  the  heat,  pungency,
Chap.  XLII  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^8^
dryness,  lightness  and  non-sliminess  of  the   latter  with the  help  of  similar  properties  of  its  own.
Sweetness,  oiliness,  heaviness,  coldness  and  slimi- ness  form  the  specific  properties  of  Kapham.  A  sweet taste,  which  is  possessed  of  the  same  properties  as  the Kapham,  respectively  increases  the  sweetness,  oiliness, heaviness,  coldness  and  sliminess  of  the  latter  with the  help  of  similar  properties  of  its  own.  A  pungent taste  is  endued  with  properties  which  are  contrary to  those  of  the  Kapham,  hence  the  sweetness,  oiliness, heaviness,  coldness  and  sliminess  of  the  latter,  are respectively  destroyed  by  the  pungency,  dryness, lightness,  heat  and  non-sliminess  of  the  former.  These have  been  cited  only  by  way  of  illustration.
Characteristics  of   Tastes  :— Now    we
shall  describe  the  characteristics  of  tastes.  A taste,  which  is  pleasant,  proves  <"omfortable  to,  and contributes  to  the  life-preservation  of  a  man,  keeps his  mouth  moist,  and  increases  the  quantity  of  bodily Kapham,  is  called  Sweet  (Madhura).  A  taste,  which produces  tooth- edge  and  increased  salivation,  and increases  the  relish  for  food,  is  called  acid  (Amla). A  taste,  which  imparts  a  greater  relish  to  food,  pro- duces salivation  and  softness  of  a  part,  is  called  saline (Lavana).  A  taste,  which  produces  a  burning  sensation at  the  tip  of  the  tongue  attended  with  a  tingling  of  the part    and    headache,  and   is  instantaneously  followed
49
386
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XLil.
b}'  a  running  at  the  nose  (fluent  coryza)  is  called pungent  (Katuka).  A  taste,  which  gives  rise  to a  sort  of  sucking  sensation  at  the  throat,  removes the  slimy  character  of  the  cavity  of  the  mouth,  gives ris6  to  the  appearance  of  goose-flesh  on  the  skin,  and increases  the  relish  for  food,  is  called  bitter  (Tikta). A  taste,  which  brings  about  the  dryness  of  the  mouth, numbs  the  palate,  obstructs  the  throat,  and  gives rise  to  a  drawing,  pressing  sensation  in  the  region  of the  heart,  is  called  astringent  (Kashaya;.
Specific   virtues  of   tastes  :  -Now  we
shall  describe  the  specific  virtues  of  tastes.  Of  these, the  sweet  taste  is  possessed  of  the  virtue  of  increasing the  quantity  of  lymph-chyle,  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bone marrow,  albumen  (ojas),  semen,  and  milk  in  a parturient  woman.  It  materially  contributes  to  the growth  of  bones,  strengthens  the  eyesight,  favours the  growth  of  hair,  improves  the  complexion  of  the bod3%  brings  about  the  adhesion  of  fractured  bones (Sandhanam'i,  and  purifies  the  blood  and  the  lymph- chyle.  Likewise,  it  proves  wholesome  to  infants, old  and  weak  men  and  ulcer-patients  (suffering  from Endocarditis — Urah-Kshata  and  is  most  coveted  by bees  and  ants.  It  exhilarates  the  mind  as  well  as the  five  sense-organs,  refieves  thirst,  swooning  and  a burning  sensation  of  the  body,  and  originates  Kapham. Similarly,    it   favours    the     germination     of    intestinal
Chap.  XLII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  387
parasites.  Largely  and  exclusively  partaken  of,  it  brings on  cough,  dyspnoea,  flatulence  (Alasaka),  vomiting, sweet  taste  in  the  mouth,  hoarseness  of  the  voice (aphonia),  worms  in  the  intestines,  tumours,  elephantisis, Vasti-lepa  mucous  deposit  in  the  bladder),  Gudopol^pa (mucous  or  slimy  deposit  in  the  anus),  and  Abhisandya (ophthalmia),  etc.
Acid  taste  : — An  acid  taste  should  be  regard- ed as  a  digestant  of  assimilated  food,  and  is  endued  with resolving,  appetising  and  carminative  properties.  It sets  in  the  natural  emission  of  flatus  and  urine, restores  the  natural  movements  of  the  bowels,  lessens  the tendency  to  spasms,  and  gives  rise  to  an  acid  (digestive  1 reaction  in  the  stomach,  and  to  a  sensation  of  external shivering.  It  originates  a  slimy  or  mucous  secretion and  is  extremel}'  pleasant  or  relishing.  An  acid  taste, though  possessed  of  the  aforesaid  virtues,  brings  on tooth-edge,  with  sudden  closing  of  the  eyes,  appearance of  goose  flesh  on  the  skin,  absorption  of  Kapham  and looseness  of  the  bod}'  in  the  event  of  its  being  largely partaken  of  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other  tastes.  Owing to  its  fiery  character,  the  taste  under  discussion sets  in  a  process  of  suppuration  in  cuts  or  burns,  or  in incised,  lacerated  or  punctured  wounds,  as  well  as in  those,  which  result  from  external  blows,  or  are due  to  fractures,  swellings,  or  falls,  or  are  brought about  as  the   after   effects  of  any   idiopathic  distemper.
388  THE  SUSHRtJTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XLli.
or  which  are  tainted  with  the  urine  of  an}'  venomous animals  or  through  contact  with  any  poisonous  animal or  vermin.  It  gives  rise  to  a  burning  sensation  in  the throat,  chest  and  the  region  of  the  heart.
Saline  taste  : — A  saline  taste  is  possessed  of corrective  (purgative  and  emetic)  virtues,  favours  the processes  of  suppuration  and  spontaneous  bursting  of swellings,  brings  about  the  looseness  or  resolution  of  any affected  part  (ulcer),  is  heat- engendering  in  its  property and  proves  incompatible  with  all  other  tastes.  It cleanses  the  internal  passages  or  channels  of  the organism  and  produces  softness  of  the  limbs  and members  of  the  body.  A  saline  taste,  though  possessed of  the  aforesaid  properties,  may  bring  on  scabies urticaria,  cedematous  swellings,  loss  or  discolorati  on  of the  natural  complexion  of  the  body,  loss  of  virile potenc}',  distressing  symptoms  affecting  the  sense-organs, inflammation  of  the  mouth  and  the  eyes,  haemoptysis, Vata-rakta  (a  kind  of  leprosy)  and  acid  eructations  etc., in  the  event  of  its  being  largely  partaken  of  to  the  exclu- sion of  all  other  tastes.
Pungent  taste  :— A  pungent  taste  is  endued with  appetising,  resolving  (Pachana"!  and  purifying properties  in  respect  of  ulcers  etc.),  and  destroys  obesity, languor,  deranged  Kaphani  and  intestinal  parasites.  It is    antitoxic    in     its     character,     proves    curative    in
Chap.  XLII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  .589
cases  of  Kushta  (skin  diseases)  and  itches,  and  removes the  stiffness  of  the  ligaments.  It  acts  as  a  sedative and  reduces  the  quantity  of  semen,  milk  and  fat.  A pungent  taste,  tliough  possessed  of  the  aforesaid  virtues, may  bring  on  vertigo,  loss  of  consciousness,  dryness of  the  throat,  palate  and  hps,  burning  sensation  and  a high  temperature  of  the  body,  loss  of  strength,  tremor, a  sort  of  aching  or  breaking  pain,  and  a  neuralgic  pain (Vata  Shula)  in  the  back,  sides  and  the  extremities,  etc. in  the  event  of  its  being  largely  partaken  of  in  exclusion of  all  other  tastes.
Bitter  taste  : — A  bitter  taste  serves  to restore  the  natural  relish  of  a  person  for  food  and  brings on  a  sense  of  general  languor.  It  is  a  good  appetiser, and  acts  as  a  good  purifying  agent  (in  respect  of  ulcers, etc.),  and  proves  curative  in  itches  and  urticaria. It  removes  thirst,  swoon  and  fever,  purifies  mother's milk,  and  is  possessed  of  the  virtue  of  drying  up  urine, ordure,  mucous,  fat  and  pus,  etc.  A  bitter  taste, though  possessed  of  the  aforesaid  properties,  may  bring on  numbness  of  the  limbs,  wry-neck,  convulsions,  facial paralysis,  violent  headache,  giddiness,  and  an  aching, cutting  and  breaking  pain,  as  well  as  a  bad  taste  in  the mouth  in  the  event  of  its  being  largel}^  partaken  of  in exclusion  of  all  other  tastes.
Astringent  taste  :— An  astringent  taste  is possessed    of     astringent,    healing,      styptic      (Stam-
390  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  XLII.
bhana),  purifying,  liquefacient,  drying  and  contracting virtues.  It  lessens  secretions  from  mucous  membranes. An  astringent  taste,  though  possessed  of  the  above- said  properties,  may  bring  on  the  peculiar  type  of heart  disease  known  as  (Hridroga)  parchedness  of the  mouth,  distention  of  the  abdomen,  loss  of  speech, wry-neck  (Manya  Stambha),  throbbing  or  quivering and  tingling  sensations  in  the  body  with  contraction of  the  limbs  and  convulsions,  etc.
Now  we  shall  make  a  general  classification  of  the drugs  according  to  their  taste.
lYI ad hura- Groups  :— The  drugs  forming  the groups  known  as  the  Kakolyadi-Gana,  as  well  as thickened  milk.  Ghee,  lard,  marrow.  Shall  and  Shashtika rice,  Yava,  Godhuma,  Masha  pulse,  Shringataka, Kasheruka,  Trapusha,  Erv^ruka.  Alavu,  Kalaukata Ankalodya,_  Piyala,  Pushkara,  Vijaka,  Kashmarya, Madhuka  (Moula),  Draksha,  Kharjura,  Rajadana,  Tala, Narikela,  modifications  of  the  expressed  Juice  of Ikshu  (Sugarcane),  Vala,  Ativala,  Atmagupta,  Vidari, Pyash5^a,  Gokshuraka,  Kshiramorata,  Madhulika,  and Kushmanda  etc.  are  generally  included  within  the Madhura  gi'oup.
Acid  Groups  :— The  fruits  known  as Dadima,  Araalaka,  Matulanga,  Amrutaka,  Kapittha, Karamarda,  Vadra,    Kola,    Prachina-Amalaka,  Tintidhi,
Chap.  XLII.]  SUTRASTHANAM.
591
Koshamra,  Bhavya,  Paravata,  Vetraphala,  Lakucha, Amla-Vetash,  Dantashatha  and  curd,  whey,  Sura, Shukta,  Sauvira,  Tushodaka  and  Dhanyamla,  etc.  are generally  included  within  the  acid  group.
Saline  Group  :— The  different  kinds  of salt  such  as,  Saindhaba,  Sauvarchala,  Vida,  Fakya, Romaka,.  Samudraka,  Paktrima,  Yavakshara  (nitrate of  potash),  Ushara  and  Suvarchika  collectively  form the  Saline  group.
Pungent  Group  : — The  component  drugs which  form  the  groups  known  as  the  Pippalyadi and  the  Surasadi-Ganas  and  Shigru,  Madhu-sigru, Mulaka,  Lashuna,  Sumukha,  Shitashiva  (camphor, Kushtha,  Devadaru,  Harenuka,  Valguja-phalam,  Chanda, Guggula,  Mustha,  Langalaki,  Shukanasa  and  Pilu  etc. and  the  components  of  the  group  known  as  Salasaradi gana  collectively  form  the  pungent  group.
Bitter  Group  :— The  component  members  of the  groups  of  medicinal  drugs  known  as  the  Aragva- dhadi-Gana  and  the  Guduchyadi-Gana  together  with Mandukparni,  Vetra-karira,  Haridra,  Daruharidra, Indra-yava,  Varuna,  Svadu-kantaka,  Saptaparna, Vrihati,  Kantakari,  Shankhini,  Dravanti,  Trivrit, Kritavedhana,  Karkotaka,  Karavellaka,  Vartaka, Karira,  Karavira,  Sumanah,  Sankha-pushpi  Apamarga, Trayamana,    Ashoka,    Rohini,   Vaijayanti,   Suvarchal^,
392  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      I  Chap.  XUI.
Punarnava,   Vrishikali  and  Jyotishmati,  etc.  collectively constitute  the  bitter  group.
Astringent  Group  :— The  component  mem- bers of  the  groups  known  as  the  Nyagrodhade-Gana,  the Amvashtadi-Gana,  and  the  Priyangvadi  and  the Rodhradi  Ganas,  Triphala,  Shallaki,  Jambu,  Amra, Vakula,  Timduka  fruits,  Katakha  fruits,  Shaka  fruits, Pashanabhedaka,  the  fruits  of  trees  known  as  the Vanaspatis  (lit  :  lords  of  the  forest,  such  as  the  Vata, the  Ashvattha  etc.)  and  most  of  the  component  members of  the  group  known  as  the  Salasaradi  Gana,  as  well  as Kuruvaka,  Kovidaraka,  Jivanti,  Chilli,  Palanka  and Sunishanuaka,  etc.  and  grains  and  pulse  of  the  Nevara and  Mudga  species,  collectively  form  the  astringent group.
These  .tastes,  in  groups  of  different  combinations, number  sixty-three  in  all  ;  as  for  example,  fifteen, computed  b}"  taking  two  at  a  time  ;  twenty,  computed by  taking  three  at  a  time  ;  fifteen,  computed  by  taking four  at  a  time  ;  six,  computed  by  taking  five  at  a  time and  six,  being  severally  computed,  thus  making  up  an aggregate  of  sixty-three.
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject : — The  man,  who  gradually  habituates  him- self to   the   use   of  each  of  the    six  aforesaid  tastes,
Chap.  XLII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
393
enjo5''s  a  sort  of  immunity  from  their  injurious  action in  the  same  manner  as,  a  strong  man,  who  makes  him- self successively  accustomed  to  the  action  of  the three  deranged  humours  of  his  bod)",  is  not  easily affected  by  their  pathogenetic  properties.
Thus  ends  ihe  forty-second  Chapter  of  the  Sutrasthinam  in  the  Sushruta SamhitS,  which  treats  of  the  specific  properties  of  flavours.
CHAPTER    XLIII.
Xow   we   shall   discourse   on   the   Chapter,     which treats     of     the      mode      of      administering      emetics
(Vamana-Dravya- Vikalpa-Vijna'niya- madhya'yam).
Of  all  emetic  fruits  the  Madana  (seeds)  should be  deemed  as  the  best  (most  active).  Madana fruits  should  be  dried  in  the  sun  and  powdered. Then  a  Pala  weight  (eight  tolas'^  of  the  powder  should be  stirred  in  a  decoction  of  Pratyakpushpi,  Sada-Pushpi, or  Nimva,  and  given  to  the  patient  with  honey  and Saindhava  salt,  for  emesis.  As  an  alternative,  a  potion consisting  of  the  powders  of  raw  Madana  fruits,  stirred in  a  decoction  of  Vakula  and  Ramyaka,  and  heated  in  fire, should  be'  administered  with  the  addition  of  honey  and rock-salt.  A  gruel,  consisting  of  sesamum  rice  and powders  of  green  Madana  fruits,  boiled  together,  should be  given  to  the  patient.  Likewise  matured  though  not ripe  Madana  fruits  should  be  stored  in  a  box  made  of  the blades  of  Kusha  grass.  The  box  should  be  plastered  over with  a  composition  of  cowdung  and  clay  and  kept  buried in  a  bushelful  of  Yava,  Tusha,  Mudga,  Masha  pulse  or Shali  rice  for  eight  consecutive  nights.  Then  having extracted  them,  fully  burst  out,  with  the  heat  of  the covering  grain,  their  kernels  should  be   separated   from
Chap.  XLIII.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  ^g^
their  seeds  and  dried  in  the  sun.  Then  having  pasted them  with  curd,  hone}'  and  the  levigated  paste  of sesamum  they  should  be  again  dried  in  the  sun, after  which  they  should  be  kept  in  a  clean  vessel.  A Pala  weight  of  the  aforesaid  prepared  powder  should  be pounded  in  a  decoction  of  Yastimadhu  or  of  any  of  the drugs  of  the  Kovidaradi  group  over  night,  and  given  to the  patient  on  the  following  morning,  through  the medium  of  honey  and  Saindhava  salt.  The  patient should  take  it  looking  towards  the  north  or  the  east,  and the  following  benedictory  Mantra  should  be  recited  on the  occasion.
Metrical  texts  :  -"May  tlie  gods  Bramha, Daksha,  Ashvis,  Rudra,  Indra,  the  earth  goddess,  the moon,  the  sun,  the  fire,  the  wind,  the  concourse  of  holy sages  (Rishis)  and  the  material  elements  with  the curative  properties  of  drugs  they  originate  and  nourish, preserve  thee.  May  the  potion  prove  wholesome  to  you, as  the  elixirs  prove  wholesome  to  the  Rishis,  the  nectar to  the  gods,  and  ambrosia  to  the  good  Xagas."
This  emetic  medicine  should  be  specially  employed in  cases  of  catarrhal  fever,  catarrh,  and  internal  abscess. In  case  of  insufficient  or  unsatisfactory  action  of  the potion,  the  drugs  known  as  Pippali,  Vacha,  and  a  paste of  Gaura-Sarsapa  and  Saindhava  salt  should  be  added  to it.  It  should  be  administered  warm  and  in  repeated doses   until    the    symptoms     of    emesis     would     fully
396  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XLIII.
appear.  In  the  alternative,  powders  of  Madana  kernels soaked  in  and  saturated  with  their  decoction  and subsequently  dried,  should  be  administered  through the  same  vehicle  (decoction  of  the  Madana  kernels)  ;  or milk  cream  boiled  with  the  kernels  of  jVIadana  fruits should  be  administered  with  hone}' ;  or  a  barley  gruel made  with  milk  prepared  as  above  should  be  prescribed for  the  purpose.  This  emetic  measure  should  be resorted  to  in  cases  of  Haematemesis  or  in  Haemorrhaee from  the  bowels  or  generative  organs  and  burning sensation  in  the  heart  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged Pittam.
Milk,  boiled  with  the  kernel  of  a  Madana  fruit,  should be  curdled,  and  the  cream  of  the  curd  or  the  curd  itself so  prepared  should  be  used  for  emetic  purposes  in  cases of  water-brash,  vomiting,  syncope  and  dyspnoea.  The essence  (Rasam)  of  the  seed  pulps  of  Madana  fruits should  be  pressed  out  and  condensed  in  the  manner indicated  in  connection  with  the  extraction  of  oil (Sneha)  of  Bhallataka,  and  the  patient  should  be  made to  lick  that  condensed  essence  in  cases  where  the Pittam  would  be  found  to  have  shifted  into  the natural  seats  of  Kapham.  Sun-dried  and  pulverised Madana  fruits^  mixed  with  a  decoction  of  Jivanti,  may be  administered  in  its  stead.
A  decoction  of  the  kernels  of  Madan  seeds  (Majja), saturated  with  powders  of  Pippali,  Yadi  or  a  potion  consist-
Chap.  XLIII.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
>97
ing  of  the  same  powder  mixed  with  a  decoction  of  Ximva or  Riipika,  should  be  prescribed  in  cases  of  lymphatic (Kaphaja)  diseases  due  to  acts  of  Santarpanam  (use of  emollient  remedies),  or  the  emesis  in  such  cases should  be  effected  with  a  decoction  of  Madhuk'am, K^shmari  and  Draksha  saturated  with  the  aforesaid powder.  Thus  the  emetic  remedies  made  of  Madana fruits  are  discharged.
Pulverised  Jimutaka  flowers  may  be  used  in  the same  manner  and  through  the  same  medium  or  with the  same  adjuvants  and  for  same  purposes,  as  the preceding  (Madana  fruit).  Jimutaka  fruits  should  be pulverised  in  their  raw  or  unripe  state  and  dried  in the  sun,  and  a  gruel  made  with  milk  boiled  with  the same  powder  should  be  given  to  a  patient  for  emesis  ; or  milk-cream,  boiled  with  the  powder  of  Jimutaka  fruits (lit  : — flowers*)  powdered  in  their  mature  or  hardened (Romesha)  state,  should  be  given  ;  or  the  surface  cream of  milk  boiled  with  the  powders  of  full  grown  Aromasha), greenish  yellow  Jimutaka  fruits,  or  a  Sura  (wine)  made of  their  decoction  should  be  prescribed.  These  emetic remedies  should  be  used  in  cases  of  disincHnation  for food  through  the  action  of  deranged  Kapham  (lymphatic derangements),  cough,  dyspnoea,  jaundice  and  in  phthisis as  well,  like  the  compounds  of  Madana  fruits   described
*  Fruits  include  flowers.
398  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLIII.
before.  Mature  Kiitaja  or  Kritavedha.na  fruits  may be  used  for  emetic  purposes  in  similar  combinations and  through  similar  mediums  as  the  Madana  fruits described  before.  Powders  of  Ikshaku  fruits  (Kushuma), similarly  prepared  with  milk,  curd,  etc.,  may  be  used for  emetic  purposes  in  cases  of  cough,  asthma,  vomiting and  non-relish  for  food  due  to  the  action  of  deranged Kapham  (lymphatic  disorders).
The  emetic  compounds  of  Dhamargava  flowers are  identical  with  those  of  the  kernels  of  Madana fruits,  the  former  being  regarded  as  specifically  indicated in  cases  of  chemical  poisoning,  Gulma  (internal  gland), abdominal  drops}',  cough,  asthma,  as  well  as  in  diseases due  to  the  action  of  deranged  Kapham  (lymphatic disorders).  The  pulps  or  kernels  of  Kritavedhana  seeds should  be  soaked  in  the  expressed  juice  of  emetic drugs  and  subsequently  reduced  to  powder.  The powder,  so  prepared,  should  be  strewn  over  an Utpala  or  any  other  flower  and  the  patients  should  be made  to  smell  it  in  the  case  where  the  Kapham  would be  found  to  have  changed  its  seat  with  the  bodily Vayu.  Likewise,  in  cases  of  excessive  derangement  of the  bodil)'  humours,  the  patient  should  be  given  a stomachful  of  barle}'  gruel  and  then  made  to  eject  the contents  of  his  stomach  by  causing  him  to  smell  such  a medicated  flower.  Sternutatoric  (Shiro-virechanam)  or emetic  or  purgative  drugs  prove  most  efficacious  after
Chap.  XLIII.  ]  SijTRASTHA'NAM.
399
being  soaked  in  or  saturated  with  the  expressed  juice  of their  own.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject : — Thus  a  general  outhne  of  the  leading characteristics  of  the  emetic  drugs  in  general  has  been given.  An  intelligent  physician  should  choose  an emetic  remedy  in  consideration  of  the  season  of  the year  and  the  strength  of  the  disease,  and  should  tr}-  to set  in  the  process  of  ejection  in  a  patient  either  with the  help  of  the  expressed  juice,  paste  or  powder  of the  prescribed  drug  duly  administered  through  the medium  of  an  article  of  food  or  drink,  or  through  an electuary.
Thus  ends    llie  forly-third  Cliapler  of  the  Sulraslhanain  in  llie  Sushiula Sanihila  which  deals  wiih  ihe  choice  and  mode  of  administering  emetics.
CHAPTER  XLIV.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which treats    of  the   choice     of  purgatives    (Vircchana-
Dravya-Vikalpa  -  Vijiiariiya  -  madhya'- yam.)
Metrical  Texts  :— Of  the  purgative  roots, the  roots  of  reddish  Trivrita  should  be  deemed  the most  effective.  The  barks  of  Tilvaka  and  the  fruit known  as  Haritaki  are  the  most  potent  of  all purgative  barks  and  fruits.  Similar!}-,  the  oil  of castor  seeds  (Erauda-Taila),  the  expressed  juice  of Karavellika  and  the  milky  exudations  of  Sndha  plant are  the  most  effective  of  all  such  purgative  oils,  ex- pressed juices  and  milky  exudations  of  plants,  etc. These  drugs  or  substances  form  the  principal  purgative remedies  (in  our  pharmacy),  and  we  shall  discuss  the mode  of  their  administration  in  successive  order.
A  purgative  remedy  consisting  of  the  sound  and matured  roots  of  Tri\Titam,  soaked  in  the  expressed juice  of  the  principal  purgative  drugs  and  subsequently pulverised  and  mixed  with  a  considerable  quantity  of Saindhava  salt  and  powdered  Magara,  should  be administered  through  the  medium  of  curd  or  sour rice  gruel,  etc.  to  a  patient,  suffering  from  a  disease due     to     the     derangement      of    the     bodil)'     Vayu.
aiap.XLIV]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^Ol
The  same  powder  mixed  with  modifications  of  sugar- cane juice  (such  as  treacle,  sugar  etc.),  oi  with decoctions  of  drugs  belonging  to  the  Madhuradi  group (Kakolyadi-gana),  or  with  milk,  should  be  prescribed for  a  patient  laid  up  with  Pittaja  distemper.  "*  In diseases  due  to  the  deranged  action  of  the  Kapham  the same  powder  should  be  administered  with  a  decoction of  Guduchi,  Arishta  or  Triphala,  or  with  the  addition of  pulverised  Vyosha  and  cow's  urine.
One  part  of  the  same  powder  (Trivrit),  mixed  with  one part  of  old  treacle  and  the  drugs  known  as  Trivarnaka, and  Tryushana,  should  be  administered  for  purgative  pur- poses in  a  disease  (due  to  the  concerted  action  of  the deranged  Viyu  and  Kapham).  As  an  alternative,  a Prastha  mea  sure  (four  seers)  cf  the  decoction  of  the Trivrit  roots,  mixed  with  a  Kudava  measure  (half  a  seer) of  their  paste,  and  a  Karsha  (two  tolas)  weight  of Saindhava  salt  and  Xagara,  and  boiled  together,  and  then formed  into  a  condensed  compound  should  be  used  ;  or one  part  of  the  paste  of  the  same  roots,  mixed  with  half a  part  each  of  rock-salt  and  powdered  Nagara,  should be  administered  through  the  vehicle  of  cow's  urine.  A compound  consisting  of  one  part  of  each  of  the  following drugs  viz.,  powdered  Trivrita  roots,  Nagara  and  Haritaki, and  a  half  part  of  each  of  such  drugs  as  powdered Maricha,  Devadaru,  Vidanga  and  ripe  Puga  nuts, mixed     with     rock-salt,     and     administered     through
51
402  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  Xliv  .
the  medium  of  cow's  urine,  should  be  considered  as  an effective  purgative  (in  diseases  of  whatsoever  type).
Powders  of  purgative  drugs  taken  in  adequate measures  and  soaked  in  their  own  juice  should  be boiled  with  their  roots  and  made  into  pills  (Gutikd) with  clarified  butter  and  administered  as  occasion would  arise.  As  an  alternative,  powders  of  pur- gative drugs  pasted  with  clarified  butter  boiled with  their  roots  should  be  made  into  boluses,  and the  intelligent  ph5^sician  should  administer  them through  the  medium  of  clarified  butter,  prepared  as above,  whenever  necessary.  A  quantity*  of  treacle should  be  kept  boiling  over  an  oven,  and  a  (halt  part)  of the  pu'verised  purgative  roots  should  be  cast  into  it,  a little  before  it  is  completely  boiled.  Then  the  basin  should be  taken  off  the  fire,  and  powders  of  aromatic  drugs known  as  Trij^ta  strewn  over  it,  and  the  compound  sub- sequently made  into  boluses  (Gutika)  of  adequate  size according  to  the  requirements  of  the  case  under  treatment.
One  part  of  any  of  the  pulverised  purgative  drugs (such  as  the  Trivrit  roots,  etc.)  should  be  boiled  with four  parts  of  their  own  decoction,  and  one  part  of  pow- dered wheat  steamed  in  the  fumes  of  a  separate  quantity of  a  similar  boiling  decoction,  should  be  pounded  with  a quantity  of  clarified   butter   boiled   and   prepared   with
*  The  quantity  of  old  treacle  should  be  equal  to  the  aggregate  weight  of the  other  drugs  in  the  compound  under  similar  circumstances.
Chap.  XLIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^O^?
the  same  decoction.  Then  having  cooked  a  quantity  of thin  treacle  in  a  separate  utensil,  powders  of  wheat and  purgative  drugs  prepared  as  above,  should  be cast  into  it,  immediately  before  being  completely cooked,  and  the  vessel  should  be  taken  down  from the  oven  and  allowed  to  cool.  Then  this  confection (Modaka)  should  be  perfumed  with  aromatic  drugs and  regarded  as  ready  for  use.  In  short,  this  purgative Modaka  is  good  food  as  well.
Purgative  preparations  of  lYIudga, etc.: — The  soup  of  Mudga  pulse  saturated  with  the decotion  of  a  purgative  drug,  and  taken  with  clarified butter  and  rock  salt,  acts  as  a  good  purgative  as  well. Similarly,  soups  of  other  pulses  (such  as  the  Musara, etc.)  soaked  in  a  decoction  of  any  of  the  purgative drugs  and  drunk  with  the  aforesaid  adjuvants,  exert purgative  virtues.  Drugs  possessed  of  emetic  properties may  be  used  through  the  preceding  media  of  pulse- soups  as  well.
A  bit  of  sugar-cane  should  be  longitudinally  split, and  then  paste  of  Tribhandi  should  be  placed  in  its middle  ;  then  it  should  be  tied  up  (with  the  blades  of Kusha  grass),  and  plastered  over  with  a  coat  of  clay,  and inserted  in  a  gentle  fire  of  dung  cake.  After  that,  it should  be  taken  out  of  the  fire,  fully  roasted  ;  the  juice squeezed  out  and  cooled,  would  prove  a  good  purgative to  a  patient  laid  up  with  a  Pittaja  distemper.
404
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [Chap.  XLIV.
A  compound  consisting  of  equal  parts  of  sugar  and powdered  Ajagandha,  Tvakkshiri,  Vidari  and  Trivrit  and licked  with  honey  and  clarified  butter,  proves  curative in  a  fever  with  thirst  and  a  burning  sensation  of  the body.
A  compound  consisting  of  one  part  of  pulverised Trivrit  and  a  quarter  part  each  of  the  drugs  known  as Tvak,  Patram  and  Maricha,  and  administered  with an  adequate  quantity  of  honey  and  sugar,  should  be regarded  as  a  good  purgative  for  delicate  persons.
A  Pala  weight  of  sugar  should  be  boiled  with  a  half Kudava  weight  of  hone)',  and  Trivrita  powders  to  the weight  of  a  quarter  part  (of  the  combined  weight  of honey  and  sugar)  should  be  added  to  the  boiling compound  at  the  later  part  of  the  cooking.  The remedy  should  be  administered  cool,  and  looked  upon as  a  good  purger  of  Pittam.
A  compound  consisting  of  equal  parts  of  pow- dered Trivrit,  Shyama  (Vriddha-Daraka),  Yavakshara, Shunti  and  Pippali,  and  taken  with  honey,  acts  as one  of  the  most  effective  purgatives  in  diseases  due to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Kapham.
Over-ripe  Pathya,  Kdshmari,  Dhatri,  Dadima  and Kola  fruit  taken  with  their  seeds  or  stones,  should be  boiled  (with  a  quantity  of  water  weighing sixteen  times  their  combined  weight).  The  decoc- tion    thus     obtained   should    be     boiled  with  (castor)
Chap.  XLIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^oc
oil,  and  the  juice  of  Amlaphala  etc.  (to  the  weight  of  a quarter  part  thereof),  should  be  added  to  it.  The whole  should  be  boiled  together  until  reduced  to  a considerable  consistence.  The  powders  of  the  three aromatic  drugs  (Trisugandha)  and  Trivrit*  should '  be then  added  to  it,  which  should  be  administered  to  a patient  as  an  electuary  with  hone)".  This  remedy will  prove  a  good  purgative  in  respect  of  a  delicate person  of  Kaphaja  temperament.
A  compound,  consisting  of  one  part  of  powdered Nili  fruit,  one  part  of  powdered  Tvak  and  Ela,  and two  parts  of  pulverised  Trivrit,  and  mixed  with  an adequate  quantity  of  sugar,  and  taken  with  honey and  the  juice  of  Amlaphalam,  should  be  regarded  as  a purgative  remedy  possessed  of  the  virtue  of  destroying the  concerted  action  of  the  three  deranged  humours of  the  body.
A  compound,  consisting  of  equal  parts  of  powdered Trivrit,  Shyama  (Vriddhadaraka),  Pippali  and  Triphal^ and  made  into  a  confection  ( Modaka)  (with  the  addition of  honey  and  sugar),  should  be  regarded  as  one  of  the most  potent  cures  (purgatives)  for  S^nnipata  (simul- taneous derangement  of  the  three  vital  humours), haemoptysis  and  fever.
A  compound   consisting   of  three   parts  of  Trivrit,
*  The  weight  of  honey   and    pulverised  Trivrit   should    be   equal  to  a fourth  part  of  the  entire  quantity  of  medicine  taken  at  a  time*
4o6         THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap  XLIV.
one  part  of  Triphala,  one  of  Yavakshara,  one  of Krishna  (Pippali),  and  one  of  Vidanga,  pounded together  and  used  as  an  electuary  with  the  addi- tion of  honey  and  clarified  butter,  or  made  into bolases  (Gutika)  with  treacle,  proves  curative  in cases  of  enlarged  spleen,  in  Gulmas  due  to  the  action  of the  deranged  Kapham  and  Vayu,  in  Halimaka  .Chlorosis), as  well  as  in  cases  of  abdominal  dropsy,  etc.  The present  remedy  (purgative)  is  one  of  the  most  harmless purgative  compounds  (of  our  pharmacopoeia}.  A  pur- gative compound  consisting  of  Shyama  (Vriddhadaraka), Trivrit,  Xili,  Katvi,  Musta,  Duralabha,  Chavya,  Indra- yava  and  Triphala,  administered  through  the  vehicle of  clarified  butter,  essence  of  meat,  or  water,  is  com- mended to  persons  of  dry  temperament.
Preparations  of  Purgative  Asavas (Wines): — All  purgative  drugs*  should  be  duly boiled  in  water.  Three  parts  of  the  decoction  thus prepared  should  be  mixed  with  two  parts  of  cold powdered  barley  (Phanitam)  and  again  boiled  over  a fire.  Then  after  boiling  it,  it  should  be  taken  down from  the  oven,  cooled  and  poured  into  a  pitcher previously  coated  inside  with  a  special  plaster.t  Then according   to  the  difference  of  the  season  (cold  or  hot),
*  Several  authorities  exclude  the  plant  known  as  Sudh^  (ManasS), while  others  stick  to  Trivrita  alone  in  exclusion  of  all  other  drugs.
t  A  new  earthen  pitcher  is  first  washed  with  water  and  dried  in  the shade.  Then  its  inside  is  coated  with  a  plaster  of  honey  and  powdered Pippali  and  is  fumigated  with  the  fumes  of  Aguru  (Eagle  wood).
Chap.  XLIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANaM.  407
the  pitcher  should  be  kept  buried  in  a  heap of  paddy  for  a  month,  or  a  fortnight.  It  should be  taken  out  and  understood  to  be  ready  for  use as  soon  as  it  would  emit  a  winy  or  fermented odour.  Asavas  (fermenting  liquours)  of  animal  urines and  alkaline  substances  should  be  likewise  prepared in  the  foregoing  manner.
Preparations  of  purgative  rice  Surar
(Wines)  etc.  : — Quantities  of  Masha  pulse  and  Shali rice  should  be  respectively  first  soaked  and  washed  in  a decoction  of  purgative  roots.  Then  they  should  be  dried and  pounded  together  and  made  into  balls,  which  should be  subsequently  dried  in  the  sun  and  again  pulverised.* After  that  a  separate  quantity  of  Shali  rice  steamed in  the  vapours  of  the  aforesaid  decoction,  and  kept apart,  should  be  made  into  cakes.  Then  three  parts of  these  cakes  should  be  mixed  with  one  part  of  the aforesaid  powdered  ball.  The  compound  thus  obtained should  be  soaked  in  an  adequate  quantity  of  that purgative  decoction  previously  kept  apart  in  an  earthen pitcher  of  the  plastered  type,  described  before.  The  Sura should  be  deemed  ready  for  use,  as  soon  as  it  would emit  the  peculiar  honey-like  smell.  Suras  of  emetic drugs  should  be  likewise  made  in  the  same  manner.
Preparations  of  purgative  Souvira-
kas  (Barley  Wines)  ;~-Trivrit  roots   and   drugs
*  For  imparting  to  it  liie  necessary  Enzyme,
4o8  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XLiv.
belonging  to  the  groups  of  Vidarigandha  and  major Panchamulam,  as  well  as  Murva,  Sh^rngashta,  Sudha, Haimavati,  Triphala,  Ativisha  and  Vacha  should be  mixed  together  and  then  set  apart  in  two equal  parts.  A  decoction  should  be  made  of  one  of them,  while  the  other  should  be  reduced  to  a  state of  powder.  After  that,  a  quantity  of  well  thrashed and  huskless  barlej^  should  be  soaked  in  the  aforesaid decoction  for  seven  days,  and  should  be  subsequently dried  and  fried  a  little.  Then  three  parts  of  the latter  and  one  part  of  the  aforesaid  powder  (powdered Trivrita  roots  etc.)  should  be  mixed  together  and  soak- ed in  the  aforesaid  cold  decoction  of  those  drugs. The  mixture  should  be  then  kept  into  an  earthen pitcher  of  the  foregoing  type  and  administered  in  ade- quate doses  as  soon  as  the  characteristic  winy  smell of  the  mixture  (Jatarasa)  would  be  detected.  The  pre- paration is  called  the  purgative  Sauvirakam.
Preparations  of  purgative  Tusho- dakam  (fermented  liquors  of  barley  with  husks): — The drugs  enumerated  in  connection  with  the  foregoing preparation  should  be  mixed  together  and  di^•ided  in halves  and  kept  in  two  separate  vessels.  One  half  of the  mixture  should  be  well-thrashed  and  tied  up  in  a piece  of  clean  linen  with  a  quantity  of  unthrashed barley  in  husks  and  should  be  boiled  with  a  decoction of  Ajashringi  in  a  separate  basin.   Then  barley  in  husks
Chap.  XLIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  409
should  be  separated  from  the  rest  of  the  components  of the  mixture  after  it  has  been  thoroughly  cooked.  Then three  parts  of  these  barley  grains  subsequently  thrashed should  be  again  soaked  in  their  decoction,  and  a  fourth part  of  the  aforesaid  pulverised  drugs  'such  as  the  roots of  Trivrit,  etc.)  should  be  added  to  it,  and  the  entire mixture  should  be  kept  in  an  earthen  pitcher  of the  before  mentioned  type.  This  preparation  is  called Tushodakam  (lit:  Washings  of  husks  ,  and  should  be used  as  soon  as  the  characteristic  smell  of  fermentation (Jatarasa)  would  be  emitted  from  the  pitcher.  The processes  of  preparing  Sauvirakam  and  Tushodakam have  been  described.  They  should  be  used  after  the expiry  of  six  or  seven  nights  from  the  date  of  their being  in  the  pitcher.
The  rules  and  processes  regarding  the  preparation of  Tri\Tit  compounds  hold  good  in  cases  of  similar  pre- parations made  of  the  rest  of  purgative  drugs  (such as,  Danti,  Dravanti,  etc.)
The  roots  of  Danti  and  Dravanti  should  be  first pulled  up  and  collected,  after  which  they  should  be dried  in  the  sun.  After  that,  they  should  be  mixed  with honey  and  pasted  Pippali  and  placed  in  a  box  of  Kusha grass  firmly  tied  up  and  plastered  with  a  layer  of  clay. The  box  should  be  put  into  a  fire  of  dried  cowdung cakes.  The  compound  inside  the  plastered  grass  box should  be  cooked  according  to  the  process  of  Putapaka,
52
4IO  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [  Chap.  XLIV.
and  should  be  taken  out  and  used  in  diseases  due  to the  action  of  the  deranged  Kapham  and  Pittam  and  in combination  and  through  vehicles  described  in  connec- tion with  the  purgative  compounds  of  Trivrit.
Pastes  (Kalkas'  and  decoctions  of  Danti  and  Dra- vanti  should  be  boiled  with  clarified  butter,  and  Chakra Tailam  (sesamum  oil  pressed  in  an  oil  mill).  The  clarified butter,  thus  cooked  and  prepared,  would  prove  curative  in cases  of  Erysipelas,  Kaksha,  burning  sensation  of  the body  and  Alaji,  while  cases  of  Meha,  Gulma,  retention of  flatus,  (kapham)  and  obstruction  of  the  bowels would  prove  amenable  to  the  oil  above  described. Diseases  due  to  the  retention  of  urine,  semen  and Vavu  or  fecal  matter  readily  yield  to  one  of  the  four  oily substances  (Chatuh-sneha,  oil,  clarified  butter,  lard  and marrow)  cooked  and  prepared  with  the  paste  and decoction  of  Danti  and  Dravanti.
A  compound  consisting  of  Danti,  Dravanti,  Maricha, Kanakahvaya,  Yavasaka,  \'ishs^a-veshaja,  Mridvika, and  Chitraka  powdered  together  and  successi^"ely  soaked in  cow's  urine  for  seven  days,  should  be  administered for  purgative  purposes,  through  the  medium  of  clarified butter.  A  diet  of  powdered  barley,  stirred  in  honey, should  be  given  to  the  patient  after  the  assimilation  of the  abovesaid  medicine.  Diseases  such  as  indigestion, pain  at  the  sides,  jaundice,  enlargement  of  the  spleen as  well  as   those   due   to   the   combined   action   of  the
Chap.  XLIV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  41  j
deranged   Kapham  and   Pittam    readily   yield   to   the curative  efficacy  of  this  purgative  remedy.
Twenty  pulverised  Pathyas  mixed  with  the  powders of  Danti  and  Chitraka  roots,  each  weighing  a  Pala  in weight,  as  well  as  with  two  tola  weights  each  of powdered  Pippali  and  Trivrit,  should  be  cooked with  eight  pala  weights  of  treacle.  The  com- pound thus  prepared  should  be  made  into  ten  large balls  of  confection  (Modaka),  each  of  which  should  be taken  on  every  tenth  da}'.  Warm  water  should  be  used for  drinking  and  bathing  purposes  while  using  the  medi- cine, which  does  not  entail  any  strict  regimen  of conduct  (as  non-exposure  to  cold  wind,  etc.).  It  proves curative  in  dysentery,  jaundice,  pile  and  cutaneous affections  and  subdues  the  three  deranged  humours  of the  bod5\
Trivrida'Shtaka  :~The  nine  following  drugs, viz.  Trikatu,  Trijata,  Musta,  Vidanga  and  Amalaka taken  in  equal  parts,  and  eight  parts  of  Trivit,  and  two parts  of  Danti  roots  should  be  separately  pulverised  and sieved  through  a  piece  of  thin  linen.  The  powders  thus prepared  should  be  pounded  together  and  mixed  with six  parts  of  sugar  and  a  little  quantity  of  honey  and rock  salt.*  Cold  water  should  be  given  to  the  patient after  he  had  taken  the  medicine,  which   proves  curative
*  The  term  little  (Ishat)  in  the    present    instance    stands    for  a   quarter part.
412  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLIV.
in  colic  pain  in  the  bladder  (Vasti-Shula),  thirst,  fever, vomiting,  anasarca  (Shotha),  chlorosis  and  vertigo.  It does  not  entail  any  strict  regimen  of  conduct  like  other purgatives  and  acts  as  a  good  eliminator  of  poison.  The compound  is  called  the  Trivridashtakam  and  is  specially recommended  in  Pittaja  affections.  Persons,  suffering from  diseases  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Pittam and  Kapham,  should  take  the  medicine  through  the vehicle  of  milk.  The  medicine  should  be  prescribed for  rich  persons,  owing  to  its  dietetic  character.
Purgative  barks  : — The  external  skin  of  the Lodhra  bark,  to  the  exclusion  of  its  inner  lining,  should be  taken  and  pulverised.  The  powder,  thus  prepared, should  be  divided  into  three  equal  parts,  two  of  which should  be  soaked  in  a  decoction  of  the  same  (Lodhra) bark  and  filtered  twenty- one  times  according  to  the process  laid  down  in  connection  with  the  preparation  of alkalis.  The  remaining  third  part  of  the  powders  should be  soaked  in  the  aforesaid  filtered  decoction  and subsequently  dried  in  the  sun,  and  again  soaked  in  a decoction  of  the  drugs,  which  coUectiveh'  go  by the  name  of  Dashamulam.  The  medicine  should  be prescribed  in  forms  (wines,  electuaries,  etc.)  pre- viously described  in  connection  with  the  Trivrit compounds.
The  mode  ol  preparing  and  administering  purgative medicines  out  of  barks  endued  with  similar  virtues  has
Chap.  XLIV.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  413
been  described.    We   shall   presently  deal   with   those made  with  purgative  fruits.
Fruit  Purgatives  :— Sound  and  stoneless Haritakis  administered  in  the  wa}'  of  Trivrit  com- pounds  prove  curati^'e  in  all  forms  of  disease  and in  malignant  sores  and  internal  abscesses.  Thev  are the  best  of  elixirs  and  improve  the  intellectual faculties.  Haritaki  and  Vidanga,  as  well  as  rock  salt, Xagaram,  Trivrit  and  Maricha  mixed  in  equal  parts and  taken  with  cow's  urine,  act  as  good  purgatives. Similar!}',  powders  of  Haritaki,  Bhadra-daru,  Kushtham, Puga-phalam,  Saindhava  salt  and  Shringaveram  taken through  the  medium  of  cow's  urine,  act  as  good  purga- tive. For  purgative  purposes,  a  man  should  lick  a  com- pound consisting  of  the  powders  of  Xilini  fi-uits,  Nagara, Abhaya  and  treacle  and  subsequently  drink  a  good draught  ot  vrarin  water.  A  compound  composed  of Haritakis  pasted  with  a  decoction  of  the  drugs  con- stituting the  group  of  Pippalyadi  and  a  bit  of Saindhava  salt,  exerts  an  instantaneous  purgative  action.
Haritakis  eaten  with  Nagaram  or  treacle  and  with a  bit  of  rock  salt  added  to  it,  is  an  excellent  stomachic. The  specific  virtue  of  Haritaki  consists  in  restoring  the normal  condition  of  the  bodily  Vayu  (laxative),  in rejuvenating  an  used  up  or  exhausted  frame,  and  in soothingly  in^•igorating  the  sense  organs.  Haritaki destroys   all   diseases,   which   are   due   to    the   use    of
414  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XLIV .
sweet  or  richly  cooked  dishes  (Santarpanam)  such  as, thirst,  etc.  Amalakam  is  cooling,  and  refrigerent ;  it  sub- dues Pittam  and  Kapham  and  is  antifat  in  its  virtues. Vibhitakam  is  cooling  ;  it  subdues  Pittam  and  Kapham. The-  group  of  medicinal  fruits  known  as  the  Triphala consists  of  Haritaki,  Amalakam  and  Vibhitakam,  which are  collectively  marked  by  an  acid-astringent  taste  with a  shade  of  bitter  and  sweet.  Powdered  Triphala regularh'  taken  with  clarified  butter  of  a  three  quarter part  of  its  own  weight  acts  as  a  regular  panacea  and is  endued  with  a    rejuvenating  virtue.
All  fruits  possessed  of  purgative  properties, should  be  used  in  the  manner  described  in  connection with  Haritaki  with  the  exception  of  Chaturangulas.  The Chaturangula  fruit  should  be  collected  in  the  proper season,  and  then  kept  buried  for  a  week  in  a  bed  of sand.  After  that,  they  should  be  unearthed  and  dried in  the  sun,  and  their  stones  or  seeds  (lit.  marrow)  should be  taken  out.  Then  the  essential  oil  of  the  seeds should  be  extracted  by  pressing  them  in  an  oil-mill  like the  seeds  of  sesamum,  or  b}'  boiling  them  with  water (hot  expression).  The  oil  is  a  good  purgative  for  a child  up  to  its  twelfth  year.
Hot  water  taken  after  having  licked  a  compound consisting  of  Castor  oil  saturated  with  powdered Kushtha  and  Trikatus,  acts  as  a  good  purgative.  Castor oil  taken  with  a  decoction  of  Triphalas,  double   its  own
Chap.  XLIV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  41^
measure,  or  with  milk  or  extract  of  meat,  acts  as  a good  purgative,  which  should  be  prescribed  for  infants, old  men,  or  persons  debilitated  from  the  effects  of ulcer  cachexia,  or  of  delicate  constitution.
I  have  finished  describing  the  preparation  and  appli- cation of  fruit  purgatives.  Now  hear  me,  O  Sushruta, discourse  on  similar  milky  exudations  of  plants  and trees,  etc.  which  are  possessed  of  purgative  properties. The  milky  juice  of  a  Sudha  plant  is  the  strongest of  all  purgatives,  which  being  imprudently  used by  a  medical  ignoramus,  may  be  attended  with dangerous  consequences,  while  the  same  in  the  hands of  a  judicious  physician  proves  strong  enough  to  dis- integrate a  mighty  accumulation  of  deranged  humours and  to  successfully  combat  man}'  an  irremediable  dis- temper.
One  part  of  the  decoction  of  each  of  the  drugs constituting  the  gi'oup  of  major  Panchamulam  and Vrihati,  etc.  should  be  mixed  with  one  part  of  the  milky juice  of  a  Sudha  plant  (thus  forming  an  eighth  part  of the  whole  compound).  After  having  boiled  it  over a  charcoal  fire,  the  compound  should  be  taken  with two  Tola  (kola)  weights  of  any  acid  liquid  (such  as  wine, sour  rice  gruel,  cream  of  curd,  etc.)  in  the  manner  of Trivrit  compounds.  A  gruel  made  of  rice  saturated  with the  milky  exudation  of  a  Mahavriksha,  or  a  sweetened, porridge-like  preparation  of  the  same  substance  (Utka-
41 6  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.XLIv.
rika)  made  with  treacle,  should  be  deemed  as  possessed of  purgative  properties.  As  an  alternative,  an  electuary composed  of  sugar,  clarified  butter  and  the  milky  juice of  a  Snuhi  plant,  should  be  used  for  purgative  purposes.
Powders  of  Pippali  soaked  in  the  milk}^  juice  of the  same  plant  should  be  used  with  rock  salt  for  moving the  bowels.  Powdered  Kampillakam  made  into  boluses with  Snuhi  juice  ma)^  be  as  well  prescribed  for  the  same end.  Powders  of  Saptala,  Shankhini,  Danti,  Trivrit  and kernel  of  Aragvadham,  should  be  saturated  with  cow's urine  and  then  soaked  in  the  milky  juice  of  a  Snuhi plant  successively  for  seven  consecutive  days.*  A  smell of  the  powder  thus  prepared  and  strewn  over  the flower-garlands,  and  clothes  worn  by  a  man  whose bowels  are  easil}^  moved,  acts  as  a  mild  purgative.
The  use  and  preparation  of  purgative  remedies concocted  with  roots,  barks  and  milk}'  exudations  of plants,  etc.  have  been  described,  w-hich  should  be prescribed  after  carefully  considering  the  nature  of the  case  under  treatment  and  according  to  their  specific indications.
A  compound  consisting  of  three  Shana  weights (one    tola   and   a   half)    of   powdered     Trivrit,     three
*  The  mode  of  preparing  the  porridge  is  as  follows  : — First  the  wheat should  be  saturated  with  the  milky  juice  of  a  JNlaha-Vriksha  and  then macerated.  The  powder  should  be  then  cooked  with  mil-<  and  treacle  and made  into  a  thick  porridge.
Chap.  XLIV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  4,7
Shana  weights  of  powdered  Triphala  pulp,  and  three Shana  weights  of  powdered  Vidanga,  Pippali  and Yavakshara,  mixed  and  pounded  together,  should  be licked  with  honey  and  clarified  butter,  or  they  should be  made  into  a  confection  with  treacle  for  purgative purposes.  The  medicine  does  not  entail  any  strict regimen  of  diet  and  conduct.  It  is  one  of  the  most effective  remedies  (of  our  pharmacopoeia)  and  proves curative  in  Gulmas,  enlargement  of  the  spleen,  cough, Halimakam  (  chlorosis  ),  non-relish  for  food  and in  diseases  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged Kapham  and  Vayu.  A  wise  and  intelligent  physician should  administer  purgative  medicines  through  the vehicles  of  clarified  butter,  oil,  milk,  Mad3'a  (wine) cow's  urine,  meat  essence,  or  through  the  expressed juice  of  drugs,  or  through  articles  of  food,  or  in forms  of  electuar}'.  The  six  kinds  of  purgatives  are the  milky  exudations,  expressed  juices,  pastes,  decoctions, cold  infusions  and  powders  of  medicinal  drugs  or herbs,  and  each  of  these  preceding  factors  should  be deemed  stronger  than  the  one  immediately  following it  in  the  order  of  enumeration.
Thus  ends  the  forty-fourth  Chapter  of  the  Sutrasthinam  in  the  Sushruta SamhitS,  which  treats  of  the  choice  of  purgatives.
53
CHAPTER    XLV.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter,  which deals  with  the  rules  to  be  observed  in  respect  of  liquid substances  in  general  (Drava-Dravya-Vidhi- madhyaryam).
Water  Group  : — Atmospheric,  or  rain  water is  possessed  of  a  non-patent  taste.  It  is  ambrosial in  its  nature,  pleasant  and  beneficial  to  life.  It  is enlivening,*  invigorating  or  strength-giving,  f  re- frigerent,  frigorific,  antipyrotic_,  anti-hypnotic,  and conquers  vertigo,  drowsiness  and  fits  of  fainting. It  is  most  wholesome  to  the  human  body.  After having  fallen  upon  the  surface  of  the  earth  it  acquires  one of  the  six  different  tastes  according  to  the  nature of  its  receptacle  such  as,  a  river,  or  a  Xada  (a  river with  a  masculine  name),  a  pond,  a  tank  (Vapi)  i, a  Kupa  §,  a  Chunti  \\,  a  fountain,  an  Artesian spring  a  Vikira  1,  fallow  land  (Kedar),  or  a  pond covered      over     with     a    growth     of    aquatic    plants
*  Enlivens  ihe  body  during  fits  of  fainting  and  such  like  cases.
+  Imparts  strength  to  the  exhausted  or  emaciated  frames.
J  A  tank  or  a  large  well  with  its  sides  protected  by  buttresses  of masonry  work.
§  A  well  with  flights  of  masonry  steps  descending  to  its  bottom.
II  An  ordinary  well,  unprotected  by  buttresses  and  unpro\-ided  with steps.
If  A  flow  of  subterranean  water  dug  out  of  a  bed  of  sand.
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  419
(Palvala).  Certain  authorities  maintain  that  heavenly or  atmospheric  water  having  fallen  on  a  red,  brown, grey,  yellow,  blue  or  white  coloured  soil,  respectively assumes  a  sweet,  acid,  saline,  pungent,  bitter  or  an astringent  taste.  But  the  theory  is  not  a  soTind one  in  as  much  as  the  comparative  predominance of  the  attributes  of  the  five  material  principles  in a  particular  soil  determines  the  taste  of  the  water contained  therein.  Water,  contained  or  collected  in a  soil  marked  by  a  predominance  of  the  attributes of  earth-principle,  acquires  an  acid  and  saline  taste. Water,  contained  in  a  soil  marked  by  a  predominance of  the  attributes  of  fire,  acquires  a  bitter  and  pungent taste.  Water,  contained  in  a  soil  marked  by  a  pre- dominance of  the  attributes  of  air,  acquires  an astringent  taste.  The  sky  is  devoid  of  all  tastes,  and hence,  the  water  contained  in  a  soil,  which  is  largely possessed  of  the  specific  attributes  of  that  element, is  characterised  by  the  absence  of  any  taste  whatever. Only  the  last  named  kind  should  be  used  for  drinking purposes  where  atmospheric  water  would  not  be available.
Atmospheric  water  (Antariksha  Jalam),  in  its turn,  may  be  divided  into  four  classes  such  as, rain  water,  hail  water,  frost  water  or  dew,  and snow  water,  of  which  the  first  is  the  best  for  its lightness.  Rain  water  may  be  divided  into  two classes    such  as    the    Gangam  and    the    Samudram,
^20  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [Chap.  XLV.
according  as  the  rain- cloud  is  charged  with  vapours evaporated  from  the  bosom  of  the  Ganges  or  the  sea. Gangetic  rain  generally  descends  in  the  month  of Ashvina,  but  both  kinds  should  be  subjected  to  a test;  The  test  in  the  case  of  Gangam  rain  water consists  in  exposing  to  it,  for  a  Muharta  (forty-eight minutes),  a  quantity  of  undiscoloured  Shali  rice  in  a silver  bowl  which  is  not  extremely  softened  by  boiling. To  ascertain  whether  it  is  Gangetic  rain  water  or  not, Gangetic  rain  water  should  be  ascertained  from  the fact  of  the  aforesaid  Shali  rice  not  being  in  any  way affected  in  its  colour  ;  whereas  a  change  in  its colour  under  exposure,  as  well  as  the  fact  of  its being  formed  into  shredd}'  or  seedy  balls  mixed  with slimy  secretions,  would  indicate  that  the  rain  water  had been  formed  of  the  vapours  of  the  sea  ;  Samudram),  and should  be  regarded  as  extremely  unwholesome.  Rain water  from  a  cloud  entirely  formed  of  sea-vapours  and collected  in  the  month  of  Ashvina,  is  as  wholesome as  what  is  technically  known  as  Gangetic  rain  water, but  the  latter  is  the  best  of  the  several  kinds  of  atmos- pheric water.
The  means  of  collecting  atmospheric  (rain)  water is  as  follows  : — A  broad  piece  of  clean  and  white linen  should  be  hung  out  in  the  open  air,  (with  a  stone placed  across  the  middle  to  dip  its  centre  of  gravity). The  rain  water  thus   collected   should  be   kept  in  a
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTKASTHANAM.  421
vessel.  As  an  alternative,  rain  water  flowing  from the  waterspouts  of  a  house  should  be  collected in  a  clean  receptacle,  and  subsequently  poured  into a  golden,  silver  or  an  earthen  vessel.  The  water  thus collected  can  be  taken  at  all  times,  and  ma}^*  be substituted  by  any  other  terrestrial  water  in  the event  of  its  not  being  available  at  the  time.
Terrestrial  water  is  generally  marked  by  a  pre- dominance of  the  specific  properties  of  the  sky,  and admits  of  being  grouped  (under  seven  sub-heads  such as,  well-water,  river-water,  lake- water,  tank- water, fountain  water,  spring  (Artesian)  water,  and  Chunti  (well unprovided  with  masonry  steps)  water.  Atmospheric or  spring  water  should  be  used  for  their  high  efficacy during  the  rains  (Varsha).  All  kinds  of  water  may  be used  in  Sharat  on  account  of  their  clearness.  Lake  or tank  water  should  be  used  in  Hemanta  ;  well  and  foun- tain water,  in  spring*  (Vasanta)  and  summer ;  and Chunti  water,  as  well  as  all  water  not  of  recent  origin, nor  due  to  an  excessive  down-pour  or  inundation, should  be  used  during  Prdvrit.
Metrical  Texts  : — He  falls  an  easy  victim  to internal  and  external  diseases  (cutaneous  affections), etc.,   who   drinks  of  or  bathes     in   a   pool    of  water,
*  The  "  rains  "  in  the  present  passage  should  be  interpreted  to  mean the  end  of  the  rainy  season  or  the  month  of  Ashvina,  and  not  the  month  of Bh^dra,  as  its  use  is  specially  forbidden  in  that  month.
422  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.  XLV.
which  is  full  of  poisonous  worms,  or  is  saturated with  urine  or  fecal  matter,  or  is  defiled  with  germs of  vermin  or  decomposed  animal  organisms,  or  is covered  over  with  the  growths  of  aquatic  plants,  or is  stiewn  over  with  withered  and  decomposed  leaves, or  which  in  any  way  is  rendered  poisonous  and contaminated,  as  well  as  he,  who  drinks  and  bathes in  the  freshly  collected  water  of  a  pool  or  a  reservoir during  the  rains.
A  sheet  of  water,  which  is  entirely  covered  over with  the  growths  of  aquatic  plants  such  as,  moss, zoophytes,  water  weeds,  lotus  leaves,  etc.,  or  which looks  turbid  owing  to  oozy  mire,  or  is  not  exposed  to the  currents  of  fresh  air,  nor  illumined  by  the  sun  or the  moon,  and  is  possessed  of  a  definite  smell,  colour, and  taste,  should  be  regarded  as  contaminated  or defiled  (V3'apannam).  Water  may  be  affected  with  regard to  the  six  categories  of  touch,  sight,  taste,  smell, potenc}^,  and  chemical  transformation  or  re-action  (lit  : digestion).  Roughness,  sliminess,  warmth,  and  the production  of  a  shivering  sensation  (lit  :  tooth-edge) are  the  tactual  defects  (Sparsha- Dosha)  of  defiled  water, whereas  a  varied  colour,  and  the  presence  of  mire,  sand, and  shreds  of  moss  are  the  defects,  which  mark  its  look or  appearance  (Rupa-Dosha).  A  distinct  taste  marks  the water,  which  is  affected  as  regards  its  taste  (Rasa-Dosha), while    an      unpleasant    smell    is    the    characteristic
Chap.  XLV.  J  SUTRASTHANAM.  423
of  the  water,  which  is  aiEFected  as  regards  its smell  (Gandha-Dosha).  The  water,  which  being  taken gives  rise  to  thirst  and  to  a  sense  of  heaviness  of  the limbs,  colic,  and  a  fluent  coryza,  is  said  to  be  affected or  vitiated  in  its  potency  (Virya-Dosha ,  whereas that,  which  takes  a  long  time  to  be  digested,  or  is retained  in  the  stomach  for  an  inordinate  length  of time,  is  said  to  be  affected  as  regards  digestion  or chemical  transformation  (Vipaka-Dosha).  Atmospheric water  is  free  from  the  abovesaid  defects.  The  defiled or  contaminated  water  should  be  purified  by  boiling it,  or  by  heating  it  in  the  sun,  or  by  immersing  a red-hot  iron,  or  hot  sands  or  stones  in  the  same,  and its  smell  should  be  removed  by  perfuming  it  with  the Nageshvara,  Champaka,  Utpala,  or  Patala  flowers,  etc.
IVIetrical  Texts  :— Water  should  be  drunk perfumed  in  a  golden,  silver,  copper  or  an  earthen goblet,  or  in  a  bowl  made  of  bell  metal  or  of  precious stones.  Contaminated  water,  as  well  as  rain  water accumulated  in  an  improper  season,  should  never be  used  for  drinking  purposes,  inasmuch  as  it tends  to  derange  the  fundamental  humours  of  the body,  and  is  positively  injurious  to  the  human"  system. The  man,  who  drinks,  or  bathes  in,  any  contaminated water  without  previously  purifying  it  as  before  directed, incurs  the  risk  of  being  speedily  affected  with  oedema, jaundice,    cutaneous    affections,  indigestion,  dyspnaa,
424  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XLV.
cough,  catarrh,  colic  pains,  abdominal  glands,  ascites  or any  other  dreadful  disease.
There  are  seven  modes  of  purif3'ing  water  such as,  b}-  immersing  the  Kataka  fruits,  the  gems  known as  the  Gomedha,  the  roots  of  lotus  plants,  or of  aquatic  mosses,  a  piece  of  linen,  or  a  pearl,  or  a  crystal in  a  pitcher  or  vessel  containing  it.  The  bottoms  of  a water  pitcher  are  made  of  five  different  shapes  such  as,  the Phalakam  (rectangular  wooden  stool),  the  Try^ashtakam (octagonal  wooden  tripod),  the  Manju  Valayam  (ring made  of  the  blades  of  Manju  grass),  the  Udaka-Manchika (wooden  scaffold  for  a  pitcher)  and  the  Shiky (pendent  bracket\  There  are  seven  ways  of  cooling water,  such  as  by  exposing  a  water  pitcher  to currents  of  air,  immersing  a  water  pitcher  (tied  round with  a  piece  of  wet  cloth)  neck-deep  in  a  vessel  full  of water,  churning  it  with  a  stick,  by  fanning,  or  siphoning it  by  means  of  a  piece  of  linen,  or  b}'  burying  a  water pitcher  underneath  a  bed  of  sand,  or  by  keeping  it suspended  in  a  pendent  bracket.
IVIetrical  Texts  :— The  water,  which  is  devoid of  all  smell  or  taste,  and  is  pure,  cool,  limpid, transparent,  refrigerent  and  pleasant,  should  be  regarded as  possessed  of  all  the  commendable  traits.  The  water of  rivers,  (which  drain  the  J^ngala  countries)  and flow  into  the  western  sea,  is  light,  and  therefore wholesome.      The     water     of    rivers,   which   traverse
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  .35
the  marshy  (Anupa)  countries  and  empty  themselves  into the  eastern  sea,  is  heav}'  and  therefore  not  com- mended to  be  used.  The  water  of  rivers,  which  run into  the  southern  sea,  is  neither  too  heavy  nor  too  light owing  to  the  fact  of  its  traversing  countries  which have  a  Sadharana  character.
The  water  of  rivers,  which  have  their  sources  in  the Sajhya  mountains,  begets  cutaneous  affections  ;  while  the water  of  those,  which  rise  from  the  Vindhya  mountains, produces  Kushtha  and  Jaundice.  The  water  of  rivers, which  rise  on  the  mount  Mala)'a,  begets  worms  and  in- testinal parasites,  while  the  water  of  those,  that have  their  sources  in  the  Mahendra  mountain,  begets elephantisis  and  abdominal  dropsy.  The  water  of  rivers, which  rise  on  the  Himalaya,  produces  angina  pectoris, (Hridroga),  anasarca,  diseases  of  the  head,  elephantisis, or  goitre  in  persons  using  it  for  the  purposes  of  life. Similarh%  the  water  of  rivers,  which  drain  the  eastern portion  of  the  country  of  Avanti,  or  flow  through  its western  part,  begets  piles  ;  while  the  water  of  those, which  rise  on  the  mount  of  Paripatra  is  wholesome, strength -giving,  and  conducive  to  health.
IVIetrical  Texts  : — The  water  of  clear  and swift- running  rivers  is  light,  while  the  water  of  those, which  are  sluggish  in  their  course  and  are  covered with  mosses  and  other  aquatic  plants,  is  heavy.  The water  of  rivers,  which  run  through  Marudesha  (Modem
54
426  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XLV.
Marwar)  is  possessed  of  a  bitter  saline  taste,  or  is endued  with  a  sweet  taste  blended  with  a  shade  of  the astringent,  and  is  easil}"  digestible  and  strength-giving in    its  properties.
Every  kind  of  terrestrial  water  should  l)e  collected early  in  the  morning,  since  it  is  obtained  the  clearest and  coolest  at  that  part  of  the  day  ;  and  since  these two  attributes  by  far  form  the  most  commendable  traits in  water.
lYIetrical  Texts  : — The  water,  which  gets  the light  of  the  sun  in  the  day  and  reflects  the  moon  in  the night,  and  which,  moreover,  neither  produces  Kapham nor  a  parched  condition  in  the  body,  should  be  regarded as  one  in  virtue  with  the  atmospheric  water.  Atmos- pheric water,  collected  in  a  good  and  proper  receptacle, has  the  virtue  of  subduing  the  three  deranged  humours of  the  body,  and  acts  as  a  pure  tonic  and  elixir, its  virtue  varying  with  the  excellence  of  the  vessel  in which  it  is  contained.  The  cool  and  limpid  washings of  the  gem  known  as  the  Chandrakanta  Mani  (the  moon- stone) should  be  regarded  as  possessed  of  the  mystic virtue  of  warding  off  the  attacks  of  monsters  and demons,  and  of  subduing  the  deranged  Pittam.  They  are beneficial  in  fever  and  in  cases  of  poisoning  marked  by a  burning  sensation  of  the  body,  etc.
Cold  water  usually  proves  beneficial  in  epileptic  fits,
Chap.  XLV.l  SUTRASTHANAM.
427
in  hot  seasons,  and  in  a  burning  sensation  of  the  body due  to  the  deranged  action  of  the  Pittam,  in  blood- poisoning,  ha3moptysis,  abuse  of  wine  (Mad^tya), loss  of  consciousness,  fatigue  or  exhaustion,  vertigo, Tamaka  and  vomiting.  The  use  of  cold  \v*ater should  be  avoided  in  pain  at  the  sides  (pleurodynia  ?), in  catarrh,  in  rheumatism,  in  diseases  of  the larynx,  in  distention  of  the  stomach  by  gas  or  air,  in cases  of  undigested  faeces,  in  the  acute  stage  of  fever, and  just  after  the  exhibition  of  any  emetic  or  purgative remedy,  in  hic-cough,  and  immediately  following  upon an  oily  or  fatty  drink  (Snehapana).  River  water  pro- duces Vayu  and  a  parched  condition  in  the  body,  and is  light,  stomachic  and  (Lekhana)  liquefacient.  On  the contrary,  that  which  is  heavy,  comparatively  denser  in its  consistency,  sweet,  and  cooling,  brings  on  catarrh. The  water  of  a  lake  ( Sarasam)  quenches  thirst  and  is strength-giving,  light,  sweet  and  astringent.  The water  of  a  pond  or  a  tank  (Tadaga)  produces  V^yu, and  is  sweet,  astringent,  and  pungent  in  digestion.  The water  from  a  Vapi  (a  large  tank)  subdues  the  deranged Vayu  and  Kapham,  and  generates  Pittam,  and  is  pungent in  taste  and  is  found  to  be  charged  with  a  solution  of alkali.  The  water  from  a  Chunti  is  a  good  digestant, sweet,  and  parchifying,  though  it  does  not  give  rise  to Kapham  in  the  system.  The  water  from  a  well  (Kupa) generates  Pittam  and  is  appetising.  It  subdues  the deranged   Kapham,  and  is  light    and    alkaline.    The
428  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         Chap.  XLV.
water  of  a  fountain  is  light,  appetising,  and  pleasant, and  destroys  Kapham.  The  water  of  an  Artesian  spring is  sweet,  and  subdues  Pittam.  It  is  antacid  in  its digestive  reaction.  The  water  from  a  Vikira  is  light, appetising,  pungent,  and  is  charged  with  potash  (Khara). The  water  accumulated  in  an  open  field,  or  in  fallow land,  is  heavy  to  digest  and  tends  to  augment the  deranged  humours  of  the  body.  The  water  of a  Palvalam  is  possessed  of  the  same  virtue  as  the preceding  one,  with  the  exception  that  it  greatly aggravates  the  deranged  humours  of  the  body. Sea-water  has  a  fishy  smell,  and  a  saline  taste  ; it  aggravates  all  the  three  deranged  humours  of the  bod3\  The  water  of  an  Anupa  (marshy)  country  is the  source  of  man}'  an  evil.  It  is  extremely  condemnable, as  it  increases  the  slini}^  secretions  of  all  the  bodily organs,  etc.  The  water  of  a  J^ngala  country  is  free from  the  preceding  baneful  traits.  It  is  faultless,  acid in  its  digestive  reaction  (Vidahi),  is  possessed  of  all  com- mendable traits,  and  is  pleasing  and  refrigerant.  The water  accumulated  in  a  Sadharana  country  is  light, cool,  pleasant  and  appetising  (Dipanam).
Warm  water  subdues  the  deranged  V^yu  and Kapham.  It  is  antifat,  appetising,  diuretic,  (Vasti- shodhak)  and  febrifuge.  It  proves  beneficial  in  cases  of cough  and  dyspnoea,  and  is  wholesome  at  all  times. Water  boiled   down   to  a  quarter  part   of  its  original
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
429
quantity  and  then  cooled  down  with  all  its  froth  and ebullitions  removed^  is  light  and  limpid,  and  may  be safely  commended  to  the  use  of  all.  Water,  boiled overnight,  should  not  be  knowingly  given  to  a thirsty  person  inasmuch  as  it  has  acquired  an  'acid taste  and  will  augment  the  internal  Kapham  of  the body,  and  becomes  positively  injurious.  Water  boiled and  subsequently  cooled  down  should  be  given  to  a person  suffering  from  an 3^  of  the  diseases  due  to  an abuse  of  wine  or  to  Pittam,  or  from  a  complaint  brought about  through  the  concerted  action  of  the  three deranged  humours.
The  water  found  inside  the  shell  of  a  cocoanut is  heavy,*  demulcent,  cool,  pleasant  and  appetising  etc. It  is  diuretic,  (Vasti-shodhaka)  spermatopoietic,  and subdues  Pittam  and  thirst.  The  use  of  water  boiled  and subsequently  cooled  down  is  recommended  in  dysentery, burning  of  the  skin,  haemoptysis,  diseases  due  to  the abuse  of  wine,  or  to  the  effects  of  any  imbibed  poison, as  well  as  in  thirst,  vomiting,  catarrh,  vertigo  and  loss  of consciousness.  Water  should  be  taken  as  little  as possible  by  a  person  suffering  from  any  of  the  following diseases  viz.,  loss  of  relish  for  food,  catarrh,  water-brash, oedema,  any  of  the  wasting  diseases,  impaired  digestion, abdominal  dropsy,  cutaneous  affection,  fever,  diseases affecting  the  eyes,  ulcer  and  diabetes  (Madhumeha,  etc),
*  Light  according  to  Jejjada.
430
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [Chap.  XLV,
The  lYIilk  Group  :— The  milk  of  a  cow,  she- goat,  she-camel,  ewe,  she-buffalo,  mare,  she-elephant, or  of  a  woman,  is  what  generally  comes  to  the  use  of man.*
The  milk  is  the  white  fluid  essence  of  drugs  and cereals,  which  enter  into  the  food  of  the  aforesaid  milk- giving  animals,  and  is  therefore  the  best  of  all  nutritive substances  (literally  life-giving).  It  is  heavy,  sweet, slimy,  cold,  glossy,  emollient,  laxative  and  mild.
Hence  it  proves  congenial  to  all  sentient  animals. And  since  milk  is  kindred  in  its  nature  to-the  essential principles  of  life  and  so  very  congenial  to  the  panzoism of  all  created  animals,  its  use  may  be  unreservedly recommended  to  all,  and  is  not  forbidden  in  diseases due  to  the  deranged  action  of  (Vayu)  or  Pittam,  or  in ailments  affecting  the  mind  (Mansa),  or  the  vascular system  of  man.  Its  beneficial  and  curative  efticac}' ma}'  be  witnessed  in  cases  of  chronic  fever,  in  cough, dyspnoea,  phthisis  and  other  wasting  diseases,  in Gulma  (abdominal  glands),  insanity,  ascites,  epileptic fits,  in  vertigo,  in  delirium,  in  burning  sensation of  the  bod}^,  in  thirst,  in  diseases  affecting  the  heart and  the  bladder,  in  chlorosis  and  dysentery,  in  piles,  colic and     obstinate     constipation,    in    Grahani,   Pravahika,
*  From  the  construction  of  the  present  sentence  in  the  original  texts,  we are  warranted  to  include  the  milk  of  a  doe,  or  of  a  she-mule,  or  of  a  cow- rhinoceros  in  the  list,  as  they  sometimes  prove  beneficial  for  external  appli- cations.
Chap.  XLV.l  SUTRASTHAiNAM.  431
miscarriage  and  other  diseases  peculiar  to  the  female reproductive  organs,  and  in  ha^'moptysis.  It  is  a refrigerant  and  acts  as  a  bracing  beverage  after  physi- cal exercise.  It  is  a  sacred,  constructive,  tonic,  spermato- poietic,  rejuvenating  and  aphrodisiac.  It  expands*  the intellectual  capacities  of  a  man,  brings  about  the  adhe- sion of  broken  or  fractured  bones  (Sandhana)  rejuvenates used  and  exhausted  frames,  forms  an  excellent  enemata, increases  the  duration  of  life,  and  acts  as  a  vitaliser.  It  is an  emetic  and  a  purgative  remedy,  and  imparts  a  healthy rotundity  to  the  frame,  and  which  through  its  kindred  or similar  properties  augments  the  quality  of  bodily  albu- men (Ojah)  and  is  the  most  complete  and  wholesome diet  for  infants,  old  men  and  persons  suffering  from cachexia  witnessed  in  cases  of  ulcers  in  the  chest,  as well  as  for  persons  debilitated  from  insufficient  food, sexual  excesses  or  excessiAC,  physical  labour.
Metrical  Texts  :— Cow-milk  is  demulcent, and  does  not  ■  set  up  or  increase  the  normal  quantity of  slimy  secretions  in  the  internal  channels  of  the  body. It  is  heavy  and  is  a  good  elixir,  and  proves  curative  in hajmoptysis.  It  is  cold,  and  sweet  both  in  taste  and chemical  reaction.  It  subdues  both  Vayu  and  Pittam and  is  accordinglj'  one  of  the  most  efficient  of  vitalising agents.
The  milk  of  a  she-goat  is  possessed  of  properties similar  to  those  of  a  cow,  and   is  specially  beneficial  to
432  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.  [  Chap.  XLV.
persons  suffering  from  phthisis.*  It  is  light,  astringent, appetising  (Dipana),  and  is  efficacious  in  dyspnoea,  cough and  haemoptysis  (Amlapitta— A.  T.).  The  milk  of  a she-goat  proves  curative  in  all  diseases  owing  to  the smiillness  of  her  limbs  and  her  agile  habits,  as  well  as for  the  fact  of  her  drinking  comparatively  a  less  quantity of  water  and  living  upon  bitter  and  pungent  herbs. The  milk  of  a  she-camel  is  parchifying,  heating,  hght, palatable  and  possessed  of  a  little  saline  taste.  It proves  curative  in  oedema,  abdominal  glands,  ascites, piles,  intestinal  worms  and  Kushtha,  and  is  a  good antitoxic  agent.  The  milk  of  a  ewe  is  sweet,  demulcent, heavy  and  proves  aggravating  in  disorders  of  Pittam and  Kapham.  It  forms  a  good  diet  in  Kevalavata and  in  cough  due  to  the  deranged  condition  of  the  bodily Vayu.
The  milk  of  a  she-buffalo  is  sweet  in  taste,  tends to  impair  digestion  and  increases  the  slimy  secretion of  the  organs.  It  is  heavy,  soporific,  cooling,  and contains  more  latty  matter  than  cow's  milk.
The  milk  of  a  she-animal  with  unbifurcated  hoofs (Ekashapha)  such  as,  the  mare,  etc.,  is  tonic,  light, parchifying,  sweet  and  acid  in  taste,  leaving  a  saline after-taste,  and  proving  curative  in  cases  of  rheumatism restricted  to  the  extremities.
*  It  has  been  recently  discovered  by   a   German    physician    thai   tuber- culosis bacilli  do  no  not  thrive  in  goat's- blood — Translator.
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  433
The  milk  of  a  woman  is  cold  and  sweet,  leaving  an astringent  after-taste.  It  proves  beneficial  as  an  errhine and  acts  as  a  good  wash  in  eye  diseases.  It  is  whole- some, vitahsing,  light  and  appetising.  The  milk of  a  she- elephant  is  sweet  though  it  leaves  an  astringent after-taste.  It  is  spermatopoietic,  heavy,  demulcent, cooling  and  tonic.     It  invigorates   the  e5'esight.
The  milk  of  a  she-animal,  milched  in  the  morning, is  heavy,  cold  and  takes  a  long  time  to  be  digested owing  to  her  entire  repose  (literally  want  of  physical exercise  or  locomotion)  during  the  night,  when  cooling attributes  preponderate.  Similarl)^,  the  milk  milched in  the  evening  is  found  to  be  possessed  of  refrigerant and  eye-invigorating  properties.  Moreover,  it  restores the  bodily  Vayu  to  its  normal  condition  owing to  the  physical  labour  undergone  by  the  animal in  the  day  time,  exposed  to  the  ra3's  of  the  sun and  the  currents  of  free  air.  Cold  or  unboiled milk  is  extremely  heavy,  and  serves  to  increase  the slimy  secretions  of  the  organs,  whereas  by  boiling it  is  freed  from  those  injurious  traits.  But  this rule  does  not  hold  good  in  the  case  of  woman's  milk, which  is  wholesome  in  its  natural  or  unboiled  state. Freshly  milched  warm  milk  should  be  regarded  as extremely  wholesome,  which,  being  cooled  down,  loses its  efficacious  virtues  and  becomes  unwholesome.  On the  contrary,  over-cooked  milk  is  heavy  and  fat-making 55
434  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  XLV.
(lit  : — imparting  stoutness  to  one's  body).  The  milk, which  emits  a  fetid  smell,  or  has  become  discoloured and  insipid,  or  has  acquired  an  acid  taste  and  looks shreddy  and  curdled,  or  tastes  saline,  should  be  regarded as  Unwholesome  and  injurious.
The  Curd-group  :— There  are  three  kinds  of curd  such  as,  the  sweet,  the  acid,  and  the  extremely acid  curd.  Milk  curd  generally  leaves  an  astringent after-taste.  It  is  demulcent  and  heat-making  in  its potency,  as  well  as  spermatopoietic,  vitahsing  and auspicious.  It  proves  curative  in  Pinasa  (nasal  catarrh), intermittent  fever  (Vishama  Jvara,  dysentery,  non- relish  for  food,  difficult  urination,  and  general  cachexia.
Metrical  Text  :— Sweet  curd  greatly  in- creases the  slimy  secretions  of  the  organs  and  the quantity  of  fat  and  Kapham  in  the  body.  Acid curd  deranges  the  Pittam  and  the  Kapham^,  while the  extremely  acid  curd  vitiates  the  blood.  Curd, which  has  been  not  perfectly  curdled  (Mandajatam) is  acid  in  its  (digestive)  chemical  reaction,  acts  as an  inordinately  strong  purgative  and  diuretic  agent, and  deranges  the  three  fundamental  humours  of the  body.
Curdled  cow's  milk  is  demulcent,  sweet  in  digestion, appetising,  srength- increasing  and  acrid.  It  subdues  the bodily  Vayu  and  imparts  a  relish  to  one's  food. Curd   prepared  with   the   milk  of  a   she-goat   is  light,
Chap.  XLV.]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  4^5
and  subdues  the  deranged  Pittam  and  Kapham.  It proves  curative  in  Vata  and  wasting  diseases,  and is  a  good  appetiser.  Its  beneficial  effect  is  witnessed in  cases  of  piles,  dyspncea  and  cough.  Curd,  pre- pared with  the  milk  of  a  she-bufFalo,  is  sweel  in digestion,  and  spermtopoietic.  It  pacifies  the  deranged Vayu  and  Pittam,  and  serves  to  augment  the  normal quantity  of  bodih'  Kapham.  It  is  specifically  a demulcent  substance.  Curd  prepared  with  the  milk of  a  she-camel  is  pungent  in  digestion.  It  is  found to  be  charged  with  alkali,  and  is  heavy  and  a  purgative. A  continued  use  of  curdled  camel's  milk  proves curative  in  Vata,  piles,  cutaneous  affections  (Kushtha), worms  in  the  intestines,  and  abdomimal  dropsy. Curd  prepared  with  the  milk  of  a  ewe  proves  aggra- vating in  derangements  of  the  Vayu  and  Kapham, as  well  as  in  cases  of  piles.  It  is  sweet  in  taste  and its  chemical  reaction  increases  the  slimy  secretions of  the  organs,  and  tends  to  derange  the  bodily  humours. Curd,  prepared  with  the  milk  of  a  mare,  is  appe- tising. It  proves  injurious  to  the  eyes,  and  tends to  augment  the  bodily  Vayu.  It  is  pajchifying  and  hot in  its  potenc}^  and  is  astringent  in  taste.  It  diminishes the  secretions  of  stool  and  urine.  Curd  prepared with  the  milk  of  a  womin  is  demulcent,  sweet  in digestion,  tonic,  pleasant,  heavy,  and  specially  beneficial to  the  eyes.  It  subdues  the  deranged  humours  and is  specially   efficacious  in   its  virtues,  and  is  the  best
4-6  THE  SUvSHRUTA  SAMHITA,  fChap.  XLV.
of  all  kinds  of  curd,  and  of  all  emollient  remedies (Santarpanam).  Curd  prepared  with  the  milk  of  a she-elephant,  is  light  in  digestion,  subdues  Kapham, and  is  heat-making  in  its  potency.  It  impairs  digestion, leaves  an  astringent  after-taste  and  increases  the  quan- tity of  fecal  matter.  Of  all  the  preceding  kinds  of curd,  the  one  prepared  with  cow's  milk  should  be regarded  as  the  best  in  virtue  and  quality.  This  curd well  filtered  through  a  piece  of  clean  linen,  imparts  a relish  to  the  food,  whereas  the  curd,  which  had  been prepared  with  boiled  milk,  should  be  deemed  the most  efficacious.  The  cloth-filtered  curd  subdues the  deranged  Va^ai.  It  is  demulcent  and  restorative, though  it  tends  to  increase  the  Kapham  without  bring- ing about  a  similar  augmentation  of  the  Pittam. The  curd  prepared  with  boiled  milk  subdues  the deranged  V^yu  and  Pittam,  imparts  a  relish  to  the  food, and  acts  as  a  good  stomachic  remedy.  It  increases  the strength  and  the  root  principle  of  life.  The  cream of  curd  is  heavy  and  spermatopoietic.  It  subdues  the deranged  Vayu,  impairs  digestion  and  is  phlegma- gogic  and  aphrodisiac.  Curd  made  without  cream  is parchifying,  astringent  and  arrests  stool  and  urine (Vistambhi),  It  increases  the  bodily  Vayu.  It  is  appe- tising and  is  comparatively  lighter,  a  little  astringent  in taste,  and  imparts  a  rehsh  to  food.
The  use  of  curd  is  generally  prohibited  in  (Vasanta)
Chap.  XLV]  SUTRASTHANAM.
437
spring,  (Grishma)  summer,  and  (Sharat)  autumn,  whereas it  is  recommended  during  the  rains  (Varsha)  and  in  the forepart  of  winter  (Hemanta),  and  in  the  cold  season proper  (Shishira).  The  residuar}^  sediment  of  curd (Mastu)  is  frigorific  and  refrigerant,  light  and  purifying to  the  internal  channels  of  the  body.  It  has  a  sweet and  astringent  taste  and  is  anti-aphrodisiac.  It destroys  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham,  and  is pleasant  and  palatable.  It  acts  as  a  speedy  purga- tive, and  imparts  strength  to  the  system  and  relish to  the  food.  In  this  group  have  been  described  the virtues  of  the  seven  kinds  of  curd  such  as,  the  sweet, the  acid,  the  extremely  acid,  the  curd  of  incomplete curdling,  the  curd  of  boiled  milk,  curd  cream,  and the  creamless  curd,  as  well  as  the  residuary  sediment (Mastu).
The  Takra  Group  :— The  Takra  (whey)  is sweet  and  acid  in  taste,  and  leaves  an  astringent  after- taste. It  is  light,  appetising  and  heat-making  in  its potency,  and  has  a  parchifying  effect  upon  the  organism. Its  curative  efficacy  is  witnessed  in  cases  of  chemical  or combinative  poisoning,  oedema,  dysentery,  diarrhoea, jaundice,  piles,  enlarged  spleen,  abdominal  glands,  non- relish  for  food,  intermittent  fever,  thirst,  vomiting,  water- brash,  colic  and  obesity.  It  subdues  the  deranged  V^yu and  Kapham,  and  is  non-aphrodisiac.  It  is  sweet  in its  digestive    reaction    and   pleasant  to  the  system.    It
438  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAAIHITA'.  [  Chap.  XLV.
proves  curative  in  difficult  urination,  and  in  diseases  due to  the  abuse  of  emollient  medicinal  remedies  and applications.
IVIetrical  Texts  : — A  compound  made  of  equal parts  of  curd  and  water  and  subsequenth'  churned  so  as to  have  the  contained  cream  or  butter  completely skimmed  off,  and  which  is  neither  too  thick  nor  too thin,  is  called  Takram.  It  possesses  a  taste  blended of  the  sweet,  acid  and  astringent.  Waterless  curd, churned  with  the  entire  butter  or  creamy  sub- stance inherent  in  it,  is  called  Gholam  {a  kind of  whey).  The  use  of  Takram  is  prohibited  in  the hot  season,  nor  should  "it  be  given  to  a  weak  person,  nor to  one  suffering  from  an  ulcer,  or  laid  up  with  an  attack of  hccmoptysis,  or  to  one  suffering  from  epileptic  fits, vertigo  (Bhrama),  or  from  a  burning  sensation  in  the body.  The  use  of  Takram  is  recommended  during  the cold  months  of  the  3'ear,  as  well  as  to  persons  suffering from  diseases  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Kapham, or  from  suppression  of  stool  or  urine,  etc.,  or  from the  effects  of  the  deranged  Vayu.
Again  sweetened  Takram  soothes  the  deranged Pittam  and  aggravates  the  Kapham.  Acid  Takram subdues  the  Vayu  and  produces  Pittam.
IVIetrical  Texts  : — In  a  case  of  deranged  or disordered  V^yu,  acid  Takram  should  be  drunk  mixed with  rock-salt,  and  with  sugar  in  disorders  of  the  Pittam,
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
439
while  in  a  case  of  deranged  Kapliam  it  should  be  mixed with  Yavakshara  and  the  powders  of  the  drugs  known as  Vyosha.  TakrakurcMka  (Inspissated  milk)  is  astrin- gent (^Gr^hi),  parchifying  and  hard  to  digest.  It  produces Vayu.  The  Manda  or  the  residuary  sediment  of  a«com- pound  made  of  the  aforesaid  Kurchika  and  Dadhi Takram  fcurd-whey)  is  lighter  than  whey.  Kilata*  is heavy,  hypnotic,  spermatopoietic  and  subdues  V^yu. Similarly,  Morathat  and  Piyusha?  are  sweet  to  the taste  and  restorative  and  aphrodisiac  in  their  properties.
Fresh  butter  (Navanita'i  is  an  albuminous  substance, and  is  light,  sweet,  cooling,  demulcent,  pleasant,  appe- tising, slightly  acid  and  astringent.  It  subdues  the deranged  Vayu  and  Pittam.  It  is  spermatopoietic, antacid  in  its  reaction,  and  conduces  to  the  improve- ment of  one's  memory  and  intellectual  capacities. It  proves  beneficial  in  cases  of  consumption,  cough, d3'spnoea,  ulcer,  piles  and  fecial  paralysis.
Butter  (of  a  few  days  standing)  is  heav)\  It increases  the  quantity  of  fat  and  Kapham,  and  imparts strength  and  rotundity  to  the  body,  and  proves  especially wholesome  to  children.  Butter  made  of  thickened milk  is  the  best  of  all  oily  or  (Kshira)  substances.     It
*  Boiled  milk  curdled  and  subsequently  heated  and  made  into  a  paste  is called  KiMta.
t  The  milk  of  a  cow  recently  delivered  of  a  calf  is  called  I'iyusha till  the  seventh  day  after  its  birth,  while,  it  is  subsequently  called  JNIoratha till  it  is  perfectly  purified  and  becomes  fit  for  the  use  of  man.
440  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [  Chap.  XLV.
is  sweet,  cooling  and  astringent  ;  and  imparts  softness to  the  body,  improves  the  eye-sight,  and  proves  curative in  haemoptysis  and  eye-diseases.
Cream  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu.  It  is a  pleasing  (Tarpani )  tonic,  is  spermatopoietic,  demulcent, palatable,  heavy  and  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion, and  proves  remedial  to  hsemoptj'^sis.
Metrical  Texts  : — The  virtues  and  properties of  these  modifications  of  curdled  cow-milk  have been  described  in  detail  since  it  is  the  best  of  all  kinds of  milk  described  before.  The  virtues  and  properties of  similar  preparations  made  from  the  milk  of  other animals  should  be  regarded  as  identical  with  those of  the  milk  of  the  animal  out  of  which  they  have  been prepared.
Clarified  Butter  (Ghritam)  :~Ghritam
or  clarified  butter  is  Saumj^'a  or  cooling  in  its  essence and  potency,  and  is  mild  and  sweet.  It  slightly  in- creases the  slimy  secretions  of  the  organs,  and  acts  as  a lubricating  moistener,  proving  efficacious  in  Ud^varta insanity,  epilepsy,  colic,  fever  (chronic)  and  distention of  the  abdomen  from  the  suppression  of  stool  and urine  (Anaha).  It  is  appetising  and  subdues  the  Vayu and  the  Pittam.  It  improves  memory,  intelligence, complexion,  voice,  personal  beauty,  amiabihty  of  features and  the  principle  of  strength  ;albumen,Ojas)  in  the  body.
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  441
It  is  vitalising,  rejuvenating,  spermatopoietic  and  heavy. It  improves  the  eyesight,  increases  the  quantity  of  bodily Kapham  and  the  duration  of  life.  It  is  sacred  and  is regarded  as  an  appeaser  of  adverse  fate.  It  eliminates poison  from  the  body  and  wards  off  the  invasions  of monsters  and  demons.
IVIctrical  Texts :— Clarified  butter  made of  cow  milk  is  sweet  in  digestion,  and  cool  in its  potency.  It  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and Pittam,  and  serves  to  eliminate  poison  from  the system.  It  improves  the  eyesight  and  possesses excellent  tonic  and  invigorating  properties.  Cow- butter,  in  its  clarified  state,  is  the  best  of  all  kinds of  butter.  Clarified  butter  made  of  the  milk  of  a she-goat  is  appetising  (Dipanam),  eye-invigorating  and strength-increasing.  It  proves  a  wholesome  diet  in cases  of  cough,  dyspnoea  and  consumption  (any  wasting disease),  and  is  h'ght  in  digestion.  Clarified  butter prepared  with  the  milk  of  a  she-buffalo  is  sweet,  heav)"- in  digestion,  and  proves  remedial  in  haemoptysis.  It  is coohng  and  increases  the  quantity  of  bodily  Kapham, and  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Pittam.  Clarified butter  made  with  the  milk  of  a  she-camel  is  anti-toxic, appetising  and  pungent  in  digestion.  It  subdues the  deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham,  and  proves  curative in  oedema,  worms  in  the  intestines,  cutaneous affections,  abdominal  glands,  and  ascites.  Clarified butter  made  with    the  milk  of    a  ewe  is  light    in
56
442  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLV.
digestion.  It  does  not  enrage  Pittam,  and  proA'es beneficial  in  cases  of  rigour,  phthisis  (Shosha)  and  in diseases  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu and  Kapham,  as  well  as  in  those  which  affect  the female  organs  of  generation.  Clarified  butter  made with  the  milk  of  a  mare  (lit  : — any  female  mammal with  unbifurcated  hoops)  is  light  in  digestion,  heat- making  in  its  potency,  and  astringent  in  taste.  It  is appetising,  anuretic,  and  subdues  the  action  of  the deranged  Kapham.
Clarified  butter  made  with  the  milk  of  a  woman is  possessed  of  e3'e-invigorating  virtues,  and  should be  regarded  as  the  protot5'pe  of  divine  ambrosia on  earth.  It  is  light  (in  digestion),  anti-toxic,  stomachic, and  constructive.  Clarified  butter  prepared  with the  milk  of  a  she-elephant  is  astringent  in  taste, and  brings  about  a  suppression  of  stool  and  urine. It  is  bitter,  light,  and  stomachic  (Agnikara),  and  proves curative  in  cutaneous  affections  (Kushtha),  poisoning, worms  in  the  intestines,  and  derangements  of  the Kapham.
Butter  churned  out  of  thickened  milk  and  clarified (Kshira  Ghritam)  is  astringent,  and  proves  beneficial  in eye-diseases,  hcemoptysis,  epileptic  fits,  and  vertigo.
The  condensed  upper  stratum  of  clarified  butter ( Jhrita-manda)  acts  as  a  laxative,  cures  aching pain     in     the     vagina,  ears,     eyes,     or     in  the   head,
Chap.  XLV.]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  ^^^
and  is  recommended  to  be  used  as  an  errhine,  an  enema or  as  eye-drops.
Old  clarified  butter  is  laxative  and  pungent  in digestion.  It  subdues  the  three  deranged  bodily humours,  and  proves  curative  in  epileptic  fits,  obesity, insanity,  abdominal  dropsy,  fever,  chemical  poison- ing, oedema,  hysteria,  and  in  aching  pain  in  the vagina,  ears,  eyes  or  head.  It  is  appetising  and  is recommended  to  be  used  as  eye-drops  and  enema, and  for  sternutatory  purposes.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject:—Old  or  matured  clarified  butter  proves curative  ni  Timira  (Gutta  Serena),  dyspnoea, catarrh,  fever,  cough,  epileptic  fits,  and  Kushtam,  in cases  of  poisoning,  mental  aberration,  and  hysteria ascribed  to  the  influence  of  malignant  planets. Clarified  butter  matured  from  eleven  to  a  hundred years  is  called  the  Kumbha  Gritam  (Pitcher  clarified butter),  while  that,  which  is  older  than  the  one  of the  preceding  kind,  is  called  the  Maha  GLritam (the  great  clarified  butter).  Kumbha  Ghritam  is said  to  be  possessed  of  the  mystic  potency  of warding  off' the  invasions  of  monsters,  while  the  Maha Ghritam  is  highly  efficacious,  sacred,  and  specifically curative  in  the  disease  known  as  Timira.  It  acts  as  a prophylactic  against  the  malignant  influences  of  all evil  spirits  and  baneful  planets,  and  should   be  taken
^^^  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAAIHITA.        L  Chap.  XLV.
by  men  in  whom  V^yu  predominates.  It  subdues  the deranged  Kapham,  and  improves  the  strength  and intellect.
The  Oil  Group  :— Oils,  which  belong  to  the category  of  fiery  (Agneya)  substances,  are  hot  or  heat- making  in  their  potencies,  irritating,  and  sweet  in  taste and  digestion,  and  are  constructive  (Vrinhanam),  and pleasant.  They  expand  through  the  entire  system  im- mediately after  being  drunk  or  rubbed  (Vyavayi),  and  are subtile,  clear,  heavy,  and  laxative  (Sara).  They  tend  to expand  the  bone-joints  and  contribute  to  their  free  and easy  movements  (Vik^si).  They  act  as  spermatopoietics (Vrishyam),  and  purify  the  skin,  improve  the  memory, and  impart  softness  to  the  skin  and  complexion.  They are  flesh-making  and  strength-imparting,  and  increase the  firmness  of  the  body.  They  are  possessed  of  eye- invigorating  virtues,  and  are  anuretic,  liquefacient (Lekhana),  bitter  and  stomachic  (P^chana).  They  cure V^yu  and  Kapham.  They  are  vermifuge  and  pro- duce a  slight  Pittam,  leaving  an  astringent  after-taste. They  relieve  aching  pain  in  the  head,  ears,  and  the female  organs  of  generation  (Yoni),  act  as  purifying agents  in  respect  of  the  uterus,  and  prove  curative  in urticaria.
The  use  of  sesamum  oil  is  recommended  in  cases  of cut,  cleft,  punctured,  severed,  lacerated,  blistered, thrashed  or  contused  wounds  and  ulcers,  and   in   burns
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  445
and  scalds  whether  due  to  the  application  of  heat or  any  vesicant  alkaline  solution,  as  well  as  in  bites of  wild  beasts  and*  birds,  etc.,  and  act  beneficially  in baths,  unguents  and  lubrications.
Metrical  Texts  :— Oil  should  be  used  in snuffing,  and  as  enematas  (Vasti),  eye-drops,  ear-drops, as  well  as  in  seasoning  soups,  curries  and  cordials,  etc. It  pacifies  the  bodily  Vayu.
Castor  Oil  is  sweet,  hot  in  its  potency \  irritating  and appetising.  It  leaves  a  pungent  astringent  after-taste, and  is  subtile.  It  acts  as  a  cleansing  agent  in  respect  of the  internal  channels  of  the  body,  and  is  wholesome to  the  skin.  It  is  spermatopoietic,  sweet  in  digestion (Vipaka),  and  rejuvenating.  It  purifies  the  semen, vagina,  and  removes  vaginal  and  uterine  disorders,  and contributes  to  the  preservation  of  sound  health.  It improves  the  memory,  complexion  and  intellect  (of  its user),  subdues  the  bodily  Vayu  and  Kapham,  and cleanses  the  system  from  all  injurious  principles  by inducing  purging.
Oils  obtained  from  the  seeds  of  Nimba,  Atasi,  Mulaka, Jimutaka,  Vrikshaka,  Kritavedhana,  Arka,  Kampillaka, Hastikarna,  Prilhvika,  Pilu,  Karanja,  Ingudi,  Shigru, Sarsapa,  Suvarchala,  Vidanga  or  of  Jyotishmati  seeds, are  irritating,  light,  non -heat-making  in  their  potency, and  pungent  in  taste  and  digestion.  They  act  as  a  good laxative,  and   prove  curative    in    diseases    due    to    the
446  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XLV.
deranged   V.-Cyu,  or  Kapham,  as    well   as    in    cases    of Kushtha,  Prameha,  head  disease,  and  intestinal  parasites.
IVIetrical  Texts  :— Ksliaiima  (Linseed)  oil  is sweet.  It  subdues  the  bodily  V^yu  and  is  strength- giving,  and  pungent  in  digestion.  Devoid  of  an}'  eye- invigorating  properties,  it  is  hot  tliough  demulcent,  and heavy.      It  increases  the  Pittam.
Mustard  oil  is  light,  and  acts  as  a  vermifuge.  It proves  curative  in  itch  and  cutaneous  affections, reduces  V^yu,  Kapham  and  fat,  and  is  pungent,  appetising and  Lekhana  (liquefacient).  Oil  obtained  from  the  seeds of  Ingudi  is  a  vermifuge,  and  is  light,  and  slightly  bitter in  taste.  It  proves  curative  in  Kushtha  and  parasitic disorders,  and  affects  the  strength,  semen  and  the eyesight  of  its  user.  The  oil  obtained  from  Kushnmbha flowers  is  pungent  in  digestion  and  leads  to  the  derange- ment of  all  the  bodily  humours.  It  is  irritating,  and  acid in  its  reaction  (Vidahi).  It  is  devoid  of  any  eye-cleans- ing property  and  brings  on  haemoptysis.
The  Oils  obtained  from  the  Kirata-tiktaka,  Atimuktaka, Vibhitaka,  N^rikela,  Kola,  Akshoda,  Jivanti,  Piydla, Karvudara,  Surjavalli,  Trapusa,  Erv^ruka,  Karkaru, and  Kushm^nda  seeds,  etc.  are  sweet  in  taste,  potency and  digestion,  and  tend  to  pacify  the  deranged  V4yu  and Pittam.  Cooling  in  their  potency,  they  increase  the  slimy secretions  of  the  organs,  impair  digestion,  and  help  the copious  evacuation  of  stool  and  urine.
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
447
The  Oils  of  the  Madhuka  (Maula),  Kishmarya,  and Palasha  seeds  are  sweet  and   astringent.     They  pacif}^ the  deranged  Kaph^m    and  Pittam.      The  oils    of    the Tuvaraka   and    Bhallataka   are    heat-making,  sweet and  astringent,  and  leave  a  bitter  after-taste.  The}^  ptove curative  in  diseases  due  to  the  action  of  deranged  V^Cyu and  Kapham,  as   well   as  in    obesity,  Meha,  cutaneous affections,  and  intestinal  worms,  and  cleanse  the  system both    b}'  their  emetic  and  purgative   actions.     The  Oils obtained  from  the  piths  (Sara    of  such  trees  as,  Sarala, Devadaru,  Gandira,  Shiushapa  and  Aguru,  are  bitter, pungent    and    astringent    in    their   tastes,    and  act   as purifying  agents  in  respect  of  bad  ulcers.     The}'  prove curative  in  skin  diseases  and  destroy  the  deranged  Va)^!, Kapham,  and  intestinal  worms.     The  Oils  obtained  from the   seeds   of   Tumvi,    Koshamra,   Danti,    Dravanti, Shyama,  Saptala,  Nilika,  Kampiilaka,  and  Siiankhini, are  bitter,  pungent  and  astringent  in  their  tastes.     They serve  to   cleanse   the   system    from   all   impurities   and baneful   principles   through   their   purgative  properties. They  act  as   purifying   agents   in  respect  of  malignant ulcers,    and   prove   curative   in    diseases    due     to     the deranged  V^yu  and  Kapham,  as  well  as  in  skin-diseases (Kushtha),   and    parasitic    complaints.     Yavatikata-oil tends  to   subdue  all  the   deranged   humours,    is  slightly bitter,  and  acts  as  a  good  elixir.     It   is   appetising,  acid, and  liquefacient.     It  is  holy  and  wholesome  (Pathyam), and  serves   to   improve   the  memory  of  its  user.     The
448  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  xLv.
Oil  From  Ekaishika  seeds  is  sweet,  and  extremely cooling.  It  subdues  the  Pittam,  increases  the  Kapham and  aggravates  the  V^yu.  The  Oil  of  the  seeds  of mango  stones  is  slightly  bitter  in  taste,  and  extremely aromatic.  It  subdues  the  Va}^!  and  Kapham.  It  is parchifying,  sweet  and  astringent,  palatable,  and  not highly  Pittam-making.
IVIetrical  Texts  : — The  therapeutic  properties  of the  oils  from  the  seeds  of  fruits,  which  have  not  been specifically  described  in  the  present  chapter,  should  be considered  as  identical  with  those  of  the  fruits  or seeds  of  which  they  have  been  so  pressed  out.  All  the vegetable  oils  (Sneha)  described  above  should  be regarded  as  possessed  of  the  virtue  of  subduing  the bodily  Vayu,  and  they  possess  some  of  the  properties, which  specifically  belong  to  Besainum  oil.  Sesamum oil  is  the  most  commendable  of  all  oils  inasmuch as  the  very  word,  which  signifies  oil  (Tailam),  is etymologically  derived  from  Tilam  (sesamum).
The  oil,  myosin  (Vasd),  fat,  marrow,  and  Ghritam obtained  from  animals,  which  live  in  villages  (Gramya), or  frequent  the  marshy  swamps  (Anupa),  or  are  aquatic (Audoka)  in  their  habits,  are  heavy,  heat- making  in  their potency,  and  sweet  in  taste.  They  subdue  the  bodily Vayu,  while  those  obtained  from  J^ngala  (such  as deer,  etc.)  or  carnivorous  animals,  or  from  those possessed  of  unbifurcated  hoofs,  are  light,  cool    in   their
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
449
potenc}',  astringent  in  taste,  and  prove  curative  in  cases of  haemoptysis.  The  fat,  marrow,  etc.  of  animals  of  the Pratuda  and  Vishkira  species  (doves,  pigeons^  etc.) reduce  the  bodily  Kapham.  Of  clarified  butter,  oil, myosin  (Vasa),  fat  and  marrow  of  animals  eacli  is heavier  in  digestion,  and  possesses  a  greater  power  of subduing  the  bodily  Vayu  than  the  one  immediately preceding  it  in  the  order  of  enumeration.
The  Honey  Group  : — Honey  is  sweet,  and leaves  an  astringent  after-taste.  It  is  parchifying,  cold, stomachic,  cosmetic,  tonic,  light,  softening,  palatable, liquefacient  (Lekhanan),  and  fermenting  (Sandhanam). It  acts  as  a  purifying  and  healing  agent  in  respect  of ulcers  and  eyes,  is  aphrodisiac,  astringent,  and  tends  to permeate  all  the  minutest  channels  and  capillaries  of  the organism.  It  is  antifat  and  pacifies  the  deranged Pittam  and  Kapham,  and  proves  curative  in  hiccough, Meha,  dyspnoea,  cougli,  dysentery,  vomiting  and  thirst. It  is  a  vermifuge,  antitoxic  and  demulcent,  and influences  the  subduing  of  the  three  deranged  humours. Owing  to  its  lightness  it  subdues  the  deranged  Kapham, and  proves  a  good  antidote  to  the  deranged  Vayu and  Pittam  owing  to  its  sliminess,  sweetness  and astringent  taste.
IVIetrical  Texts  : — Eight  different  kinds  of honey  are  commonly  used  such  as,  the  Pauttikam, Bhr^maram,      Kshaudram,      Mdkshikam,      Chh^tram,
57
450  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [Chap.  XLV.
Argh3'am,  Auddalakam  and  Dalam.*  Of  these  the honey  obtained  from  the  hives  of  bees,  known  as  the Puttikas,  is  hot  and  parchifying  owing  to  their  habit of  sucking  the  juice  or  sap  of  flowers  and  plants  without eliminating  therefrom  other  foreign  or  poisonous  matter, that  might  have  become  naturally  or  accidentally mixed  with  it.  This  kind  of  honey  is  intoxicating  and acid  in  its  re-action,  and  tends  to  aggravate  the  Vayu, blood  and  Pittam.  It  acts  as  a  liquefacient  or  dis- cutient  agent.  Honey,  known  as  the  Bhramaram,  is extremely  heavy  owing  to  its  extremely  sweet  taste and  slimy  character,  while  the  one  known  as  the Kshaudram  is  extremely  cool,  light  and  liquefacient. Honey  known  as  the  Makshikain  is  lighter,  dryer  and more  efficacious  than  the  honey  of  the  preceding  class (Kshaudram),  and  proves  specially  benencial  in  cases of  dyspnoea,  etc.     Honey,  known   as  the  Chhatram,  is
*  (l)  The  kind    of  honey    obtained    from    hives   of  large,  yellow  bee*, is  called  the  Pauttikam.
(2)  The  kind  of  honey    obtained   from    hives    of  bees  of  the  Bhramara species  is  called  Bhramaram.
(3)  The  kind  of  honey  ol^tained  from  hives  of  small,  tawny  brown  bees is  called  the  Kshaudram.
(4)  The  kind  of  honey  obtained  from  the  hives  of  large,  brown    bees  of the  jNIakshik^  species  is  called  Makshikam,
(5)  The  kind  of  honey  obtained  from  the  umbrella  shaped   hives  of  bees of  the  Chhatra  species  is  called  Chhdtram.
(6)  The  honey  obtained   from    the   hives   of  thin-mouthed  bees   of  the Argha  species  often  found  in  ant-hills  is  called  Arghyam.
(7)  The  kind  of  honey  obtained  from  the  hives  of   small    brown  bees    of the  Uddiilakam  species  is  called  Auddalakam.
(8)  The  kind  of  honey  found  accumulated  in    leaves    of  honey-bearing plants  is  called  D^lam.
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
451
sweet  in  digestion,  heav}",  cooling  and  slimy.  It  acts as  a  vermifuge,  proves  curative  in  haemoptysis,  psoriasis and  Meha,  and  is*  possessed  of  a  high  efficacy.  Honey known  as  the  Arghyam  is  possessed  of  properties highly  beneficial  to  the  eye.  It  is  a  gi^eater  subduer  of Pittam  and  Kapham  than  any  other  kind  of  honey, is  astringent  in  taste,  and  pungent  in  digestion.  It is  a  bitter  tonic  and  does  not  generate  Vayu  in the  system.  Honey  known  as  the  Auddalakam improves  the  voice  and  relish  for  food.  It  is  antitoxic,  and proves  curative  in  cutaneous  affections.  It  is  heat-mak- ing in  its  potency,  and  acid  and  astringent  in  taste. It  generates  Pittam,  and  is  pungent  in  digestion. Honey,  known  as  the  D^lam,  is  parchifying  and  proves beneficial  in  cases  of  vomiting  and  Meha.  Fresh honey  is  constructive  and  aphrodisiac,  acts  as  a  mild laxative,  and  to  a  small  extent  subdues  the  deranged Kapham.  Old  honey  is  astringent  and  liquefacient, and  reduces  fat  and  obesity.  Honey,  that  has attained  a  thickened  or  condensed  state  in  course of  time  (Pakka  Madhu),  tends  to  subdue  the  three deranged  humours,  while  thin  and  im matured  honey (Ama  Madhu)  is  possessed  of  contrary  properties, and  tends  to  agitate  the  three  fundamental humours  of  the  body.  In  conjunction  with  many  other drugs  and  medicinal  remedies,  honey  proves  curative  in various  diseases,  and  partakes  of  the  virtues  of  the  drugs or  substances  with  which  it  is  so  used  (Yoga-Vahika).
4^2  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  XLV.
Honey  is  not  collected  from  the  flowers  of  any particular  species.  On  the  other  hand,  the  honey- making  bees  cull  it  from  the  sap  and  juice  of  flowers and  plants,  which  are  incompatible  with  one  another in  respect  of  their  nature,  taste,  virtue,  potency  and re-actionary  (chemical)  effect.  For  these  reasons,  and further  from  the  fact  of  it  being  prepared  by poisonous  bees,  honey  becomes  positively  injurious after  contact  with  heat  or  fire,  and  accordingly  the u^e  of  hot  or  boiled  honey  is  forbidden.
Metrical  Texts  : — On  account  of  its  poisonous contact  in  its  origin  honey  exerts  a  similar  injurious virtue.  Used  in  a  boiling  or  heated  state,  or  in a  hot  country,  or  during  the  hot  season  of  the year,  or  in  a  heated  state  of  the  body,  honey  is sure  to  prove  fatal  like  poison.  Honey  is  specially made  injurious  by  hot  contact  owing  to  its  placidity and  coolness,  and  further  for  the  reason  of  its being  collected  from  the  sap  of  a  variety  of flowers  and  plants.  Atmospheric  water  (rain-water), like  heat,  serves  to  impart  an  injurious  character to  all  kinds  of  honey  (except  the  one  known  as the  Arghyam  Madhu).
Wletrical  Texts  :— For  emetic  purposes  honey may  be  administered  with  any  other  hot  substance, inasmuch  as  it  is  intended  in  such  a  case  that the    imbibed     lioney,    instead   of  being     retained     or
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  453
digested  in  the  stomach,  should  be  ejected  immediately
after  its  use.*
* Undigested  honey  is  more  painful,  or  gives   rise  to  a
greater  discomfort  than    all  other  undigested  substances
in    the  stomach,   more  so  because  internal  fermenfation
and  use  of  hot  water,  which  are  usually   resorted   to  in
a  case  of  deranged  digestion,  can  not  be  used  in   a   case
of  undigested  honey  retained  in  the  stomach,   owing   to
the  poisonous  nature    of  the  chemical  change   (Vip^ka)
it   undergoes  therein   in   contact   with   hot  substances
in  general.    Hence,  undigested  honey  is  as  fatal  as   any
poison.
The  Sugar-cane  group  :-  Sugar  cane  is sweet  in  taste  and  digestion,  heavy,  cool,  demulcent, strength-giving,  spermatopoietic,  and  diuretic.  It produces  Kapham  in  the  bod}",  and  proves  remedial in  haemoptysis,  and  helps  the  germination  of  worms in  the  intestines.
Metrical  text  : — There  are  many  species  of sugar-cane  such  as,  the  Paundraka,  Bhiruka,  Vanshaka, Shataporaka,  K^ntara,  Tapasekshu,  Kastekshu,  Suchi- patraka,  Naipala,  Dirghapatraka,  Nilapora,  and Koshakrit.      Now   we   shall   deal     with     the    specific
*  Though  the  use  of  honey  with  hot  substances  is  not  forbidden  in such  cases,  still  many  an  experienced  physician  of  the  Ayurvedic  scliool thinks  it  safe  to  refrain  from  its  use,  lest  it  might  be  retained  in  the stomach  for  a  considerable  time,  or  find  out  a  downward  outlet  and  pass  off with  the  stool.
454    '  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XLV.
virtues  of  each  of  them.  The  Sugar-cane  of  the Paundraka  and  Bhiruka  t^-pes  is  cooHng,  sweet,  demul- cent and  constructive.  It  produces  Kapham  and  is laxative  without  giving  rise  to  imperfect  gastric  diges- tion. It  is  heavy  and  spermatopoietic.  The  Sugar- cane of  the  Vanshaka  species  is  possessed  of  similar properties  as  the  two  foregoing  ones,  though  a little  alkaline  in  its  constitution,  while  that  of  the Shatapora  species  is  a  little  more  heat-making  than that  of  the  preceding  class,  and  is  found  to  subdue the  deranged  Vayu.  The  Sugar-cane  of  the  Kdntara and  Tapasa  species  is  possessed  of  the  same  virtues as  that  of  the  Vanshaka  class.  The  Sugar-cane  of the  Kastekshu  species  is  identical  in  its  properties with  that  of  the  aforesaid  Vanshaka  class,  though  it tends  to  agitate  the  bodil)"  Va3'u.  The  Sugar-cane of  the  Suchipatra,  Nilapora,  Naipala  and  Dirghpatra species  produces  Vayu  in  the  system,  and  subdues the  Kapham  and  Pittam.  It  is  slightly  astringent in  taste  and  indigestible  (gives  rise  to  acidity  after digestion).  The  Sugar-cane  of  the  Koshakara  species  is heavy  (in  digestion),  cooling  and  proves  curative  in cases  of  haemopt5^sis  and  wasting  diseases  in  general. Sugar-cane  is  extremely  sweet  about  the  roots,  sweet at  the  middle,  and  saline  at  the  tops  and  joints.
The  juice   of  a   sugar-cane  when' eaten  raw  is  not marked   by   any   acid   reaction   after   digestion.     It   is
Chap.  XLV.]  SUTRASTHANAM.
455
spermatopoietic,  and  subdues  the  Vayu  and  the  Kapham, and  is  pleasant  to  the  taste.  The  juice  of  sugar-cane otherwise  pressed* out  is  heavy  in  digestion,  is  long retained  in  the  stomach,  and  is  followed  by  reactionary acidity,  and  arrests  the  evacuation  of  stool  and  iiTine. The  juice  of  ripe  sugar-cane  is  heavy  in  digestion, possessed  of  laxative  properties,  keen,  and  demulcent. It  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  The  inspissated  or half  boiled  juice  of  sugar-cane  (Phanitam)  is  sweet  in taste  and  heavy.  It  increases  the  slimy  secretions of  the  organs,  acts  as  a  flesh-builder,  and  is  devoid  of  all spermatopoietic  properties.  It  brings  about  a  simul- taneous derangement  of  the  three  bodil}''  humours.
Common  treacle  is  found  to  be  charged  with  a  little alkali.  It  is  sweet  in  taste  and  not  too  cooling.  It acts  as  a  demulcent  and  purifier  of  the  blood  and urine.  It  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and,  to  a  slight extent,  deranges  the  Pittam  as  well.  It  increases fat,  Kapham,  and  corpulency,  and  is  possessed  of tonic  and  spermatopoietic  properties.  White  and  purified (Shuddha)  treacle  is  sweet  in  taste,  and  purifies  the blood.  It  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham,  and is  one  of  the  most  wholesome  diets  for  man.  Its  efficacy increases  with  its  years.
The  different  modifications  of  treacle  such  as,  the Matsandika,  Khamda,  and  Sharkara  (sugar)  which  are progressivly  more  refined,   should  be  deemed  as  gaining
456  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.    [  Chap,  XLV.
more  in  their  cooling,  demulcent  and  aphrodisiac  pro- perties, and  getting  heavier  in  digestion  in  each  of  the successive  stages  of  refinement.  They  are  successively more  frigorific,  and  beneficial  in  cases  of  ha3moptysis.
lYIctrica!  Texts  :— To  the  properties  considered as  specially  belonging  to  each  of  these  modifications of  treacle  should  be  attributed  its  power  of  producing its  own  refinement  and  efficacy.  The  virtues  of sugar  such  as,  laxativeness,  etc.,  should  be  regarded  as proportional  to  its  refinement,  freedom  from  alkaline saturation,  and  the  actual  quantity  of  sweetening  matter (lit.  substance)  contained  in  it.
Sugar  prepared  from  concentrated  honey  (Madhu Sharkara)  is  parchifying  and  liquefacient.  It  proves beneficial  in  cases  of  vomiting  and  dysentery,  is pleasant,  has  a  sweet  and  astringent  taste,  and  is sweet  in  digestion.  Sugar  prepared  from  a  decoction  of Yavasa  Sharkara  (Duralabha)  has  a  sweet  and  astringent taste,  leaves  a  bitter  after-taste,  and  is  possessed  of laxative  properties,  and  subdues  the  deranged  Kapham. All  kinds  of  sugar  tend  to  assuage  burning  sensations in  the  body,  and  prove  curative  in  hoemoptysis,  vomiting, epileptic  fits,  and  thirst.  The  sweet  and  concentrated extract  (Phanitam)  of  Modhuka  flowers  should  be regarded  as  parchifying.  It  produces  Vayu  and  Pittam, and  subdues  Kapham.  It  is  sweet,  astringent  in  its digestive  transformation,  and  deranges  the  blood.
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  457
Madya  Varga  (  Wines  and  spirits):—
All  species  of  wine  are  acid  in  taste,  and  appetising. They  generate  Pittam,  and  impart  a  greater  relish to  one's  food.  They  act  as  mild  purgatives,  subdue^  the deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham,  and  are  pleasing,  exhilarat- ing and  diuretic.
They  are  light  in  digestion  and  give  rise  to  a  kind  of re-actionary  acidity.  They  are  keen  and  heat-making, stimulate  the  sense  organs,  expand  the  joints  and increase  the  discharge  of  urine  and  stool.  Now  hear me  specifically  describe  the  properties  of  each  kind of  wine.
Metrical  Texts  :— The  wine  knov" Madvirkam  and  ]-.cpared  --.n  the  jiu>.v.  aiv...  nuits as  grapes  and  raisins,  does  not  gi'  "^  .ise  to  any  sort of  reactionary  acidity  after  its  use,  and  accordingly is  not  forbidden  by  learned  physicians  even  in cases  of  ha3moptysis.  It  has  a  sweet  taste,  and leaves  an  astringent  after-taste.  It  is  parchifying,  light and  easy  of  digestion,  acts  as  an  aperient,  and proves  curative  in  chronic  fevers,  phthisis  and  other wasting  diseases.
The  wine  prepared  from  the  juice  of  the  date  palm (Kharjuram)  possesses  properties,  which  are  slightly different  from  those  of  the  preceding  kind.  It  tends to  enrage  the  bodily  Vayu,  is  clear,  and  imparts  a  relish to  one's  food,  and  reduces  fat  and  Kapham.  It  is  light, 58
45 B  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.    [  Chap.  XLV.
has  a  sweet  and  astringent  taste,  is  pleasing  and aromatic  and  increases  the  agility  of  the  limbs  and organs.
The     wine   known     as    the   Sura   (made    of  rice- paste  and   other   fermenting  drugs)   proves   curative  in cough,     piles,   chronic   indigestion   and   diarrhoea,    and retention  of   mine.     It  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and is   tonic   and   appetising.     It    purifies   the   breast   milk of    a     woman   and   proves   beneficial   in    all   types   of diseases   of  the    blood,  as  well  as   in  wasting   diseases. White  Sura   is   used  with  benefit   in  all  cases  of  cough, piles,  diarrhoea,  dyspnoea  and  catarrh.     It  builds  up  new ^ugcii  ,^^|    tissues,  and  increases  the  quantity   of   blood. It  is*gii1[}ii!   P'guic  in  its  effect,  and  increases   the  quan- tity  of   Kaphaln^  .'  ■«   the   body.     The    wine   known  as the   Prasinna   (the    cream   or   the   limpid   surface     of Sura)   may   be   taken    with    advantage     in     vomiting, non-relish    for   food,    aching   or   colic   pain  at  the  sides or  about   the   cardiac  region,   constipation,    suppression of  stool   and   urine    or    flatus,    as  well  as  in  all  cases  of obstinate   constipation    and   derangement  of  the  bodily Vayu.     The    wine    prepared   from    barley     lYavasura) generates  PiLtam  and  tends    to  enrage  the  bodily  Vayu. It   is  dry   and   slightly   generates  Kapham.     The  wine prepared  from   Madhulika   (a   kind     of  small     barley) is   heavy    and   generates    Kapham   in    the    body.      It is    long     retained     in     the    stomach,    and    arrests   the
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
459
evacuation  of  stool  and  urine.  The  Ahshiki  ^vine prepared  from  the  bark  of  Vibhitaka  trees  etc.) is  parchifying,  digestant,  and  slightly  produces  Kapham. It  is  possessed  of  aphrodisiac  properties.  The  wine known  as  the  Kohala  brings  on  the  simultaneous derangement  of  the  three  fundamental  bodily  humours, is  pleasant  to  the  taste,  acts  as  a  purgative  (Bhedya) and  is  possessed  of  aphrodisiac  properties.  The wine  known  as  the  Jagala  (the  un(lerl3nng  dregs  or residue  of  wine)  is  astringent  and  heat-making in  its  potency,  and  acts  as  a  digestant.  It  is  parchifying, and  proves  beneficial  in  cough,  thirst  and  phthisis.  It  is pleasant  to  the  taste,  cures  diarrhoea,  distention  of  the stomach,  piles  and  oedema.  It  forms  and  subdues  the deranged  Vayu  as  well.  The  wine  known  as  the Vakkasa  /-"'"^^■^'•I'-'^.long  undigested  in  the  stomach owing  t''om  the  juice  't  iing  pithless.  It  is  a good  appetiser  and  tends  to  enrage  the  deranged Vayu,  and  acts  as  a  purgative  and  diuretic  tonic. — A.T.) It  is  heavy  and  slightly  intoxicating.  The  wine known  as  the  Guda  Sidhu  (prepared  with  the  boiled juice  of  sugar-cane  and  Dhataki  flowers,  etc.  has  a sweet  and  astringent  taste,  and  acts  as  an  appetiser  and digestant.  Sugar  wine  Sharkara  Sidhu)  is  sweet in  its  taste,  increases  one's  relish  for  food,  is  appe- tising and  diuretic.  It  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and is  exhilarating,  sweet  in  digestion,  and  increases the   action   (lit  :  rouses   up)   of  the  sense  organs.    The
460
THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.    [  Chap.  XLV.
wine  known  as  the  Pakka  Rasa  Sidhu  is  possessed of  properties  similar  to  the  preceding  kinds  (Sharkar^ Sidhu).  It  improves  the  complexion  and  imparts strength  to  the  system  and  relish  to  one's  food. It  is  pleasant,  laxative_,  appetising  and  proves  beneficial in  cases  of  Kapham  and  piles  and  reduces  swellings. The  wine  known  as  the  Sheeta  Rasika  Sidhu  (pre- pared from  the  unboiled  juice  of  Sugar-cane  in  con- tradistinction with  the  preceding  kinds  prepared from  the  boiled  juice  of  sugar- cane j,  acts  as  an anti-epispastic,  and  a  digestant  and  vocal  tonic,  proves curative  in  adeina  and  abdominal  dropsy,  improves  the complexion,  removes  the  suppression  of  flatus,  urine and  stool  (Vivandha),  and  proves  beneficial  in  cases of  piles.  The  wine  known  as  the  Akshika  Sidhu (prepared  from  a  decoction  of  Vi^^Ve  wme"ith  treacle etc.  and  improved  with  the  +l-ie  limpid  si^Dhataki) proves  beneficial  in  cases  of  ulcer  and  jaundice.  It is  light  and  astringent,  and  has  a  sweet  and  astringent taste.  It  subdues  the  deranged  Pittam  and  purifies the  blood.  The  wine  known  as  the  Jamvava  Sidhu fwine  prepared  from  the  expressed  juice  of  the  Jambalin fruit,  a  decoction  of  coriander  seeds,  treacle  and Dh^taki  flowers,  etc.)  is  anuretic,  reduces  the  quantity of  urine,  has  an  astringent  taste,  and  tends  to  enrage the  bodily  Va}^!.  The  wine  known  as  the  Surasava f  Asava  distilled  with  wine  instead  of  with  water)  is  keen, pleasant,     and     diuretic.     It     subdues    the     deranged
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  46,
V^yii  and  Kapham,  or  the  deranged  Vayii  alone,  and is  palatable,  and  possessed  of  a  more  durable intoxicating  povier.  The  wine  known  as  the Madhvasava  wine  is  light,  tends  to  disintegrate  the knotty  accumnlations  or  collections  of  phlegm  (Cl^hedi), and  proves  curative  in  Meha  (unhealth)^  discharges from  the  urethra),  cutaneous  affections,  and  poisoning (antitoxic).  It  has  a  taste  blended  of  the  sweet  and  the astringent,  is  keen  and  anti-epispastic,  and  does  not generate  an  abnormal  quantity  of  Vayu  in  the  system. The  wine  known  as  the  Maireya  (prepared  from  the Paishtisura,  treacle- made  spirit  and  honey)  is  keen,  and has  a  sweet  and  astringent  taste.  It  is  intoxicating,  and proves  curative  in  piles,  Kapham  and  Gulma  (abdominal glands  .  It  is  antifat  and  a  vermifuge,  and  is  heavy  in digestion,  and  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu.  Wines  pre- pared from  the  juice  of  grapes  or  sugar-cane  (Ikshu or  Dhrakshasava)  are  tonic  and  choleric.  They subdue  the  deranged  Pittam,  and  serve  to  improve the  complexion.  Sidhu  (wine)  prepared  from  the Madhuka  flowers  is  parchifying,  takes  a  long  time  to be  digested,  and  is  followed  by  an  acid  re-action.  It improves  the  strength  and  digestive  capacity,  and  has  an astringent  taste.  It  subdues  the  deranged  Kapham,  and serves  to  aggravate  the  Vayu  and  Pittam.  Wines prepared  from  the  distilled  juice  of  bulbs  or  roots  should be  deemed  as  possessed  of  properties  pertaining  to  them individually.    New  wine  is  heavy,  bad  smelling,  insipid,
462  TEIE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA     [Chap.  XLV.
unpleasant,  unpalatable,  and  tends  to  increase  the slini}^  secretions  of  the  organs.  It  enrages  the  deranged humours  of  the  bod}',  takes  a  long  tim<3  to  be  digested, and  is  followed  by  an  acid  re-action.  Old  Wine  is  sweet- smelli.vig,  acts  as  an  appetiser,  and  brings  on  a  relish  for food.  It  is  pleasant  and  a  vermifuge,  and  cleanses  the internal  channels  of  the  organism.  It  is  light  and subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham.
The  species  of  wine  known  as  the  Arishta (fermented  liquor)  is  highly  efficacious  owing  to  the concerted  action  of  a  variety  of  drugs  entering  into its  composition.  It  proves  curative  in  a  large  number of  diseases,  tends  to  subdue  the  deranged  humours  of the  bod}',  and  is  a  good  appetiser.  It  subdues  the Vayu  and  Kapham  and  is  laxative  and  not  hostile  to  the Pittam.  It  proves  beneficial  in  colicpain,  distention of  the  stomach,  abdominal  dropsy,  fever,  enlarged spleen,  indigestion  and  piles.  Asava  wine  prepared from  the  drugs  known  as  the  Pippali,  etc.  (Pippaly^di Asava)  proves  curative  in  Gulma  (abdominal  glands) and  diseases  due  to  the  deranged  Kapham.  The Aristhas  of  other  therapeutic  virtues  will  be speciall)''  described  later  on  in  chapters  on  Therapeutics (Chikitsitam).  An  experienced  physician  should  pre- scribe the  different  species  of  wine  such  as,  the  Aristha, Asava,  Sidhu,  etc.,  in  different  diseases  in  considera- tion of  the  therapeutic  properties  of  drugs,  which   enter
Chap.  XLV.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  463
into  their  composition,  or  with  which  they  have  been purified,  and  according  as  each  of  them  would  be indicated  in  practice.
The  following  kinds  of  wine  should  always  be rejected  viz.,  such  as  are  thick,  bad  smelling,  or  insipid or  full  of  worms,  or  heavy  and  acid  in  digestion,  un- pleasant, new,  strong  and  heat-making  in  their  potency, or  which  have  been  preserved  in  an  improper  vessel,  or which  have  been  prepared  with  a  comparatively lesser  number  of  ingredients  or  have  been  iTecanted over-night,  or  are  extremely  slimy  or  transparent,  as well  as  the  dregs  of  all  kinds  of  wine.
The  wine  prepared  from  a  comparatively  lesser number  of  ingredients,  or  that  which  is  slimy,  heavy and  takes  a  long  time  to  be  digested,  should  be  deemed as  an  agitator  of  the  bodily  Kapham.  The  wine  which is  marked  by  a  deep  yellow  colour  is  strong  and  hot, is  only  imperfectly  digested  and  followed  b}^  a  kind  of acid  re-action.  It  tends  to  aggravate  the  Pittam.  The wine,  which  is  frothy  or  putrified,  heavy  or  insipid  or is  marked  by  the  germination  of  worms  in  its  body,  or is  decanted  over-night,  tends  to  enrage  or  agitate  the bodily  Vayu.  The  wine  which  is  well-matured, and  possessed  of  its  characteristic  taste,  and  the  virtue of  improving  the  appetite  and  bringing  on  a  relish  for food,  and  which  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Kapham,  and  is mild,  good,   aromatic  and   exhilarating,  should   be   re-
464  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XLV.
garded   as   the   only  wine   fit  for  use.     Wines   may   be divided  into   a   variety   of  species   according   to   their different   tastes     and     strength.       The   potency   of    a wine    promoted     by     the     bodily     heat     of    a     man courses   upward  through   the    arteries,   and   ultimately reaches  the  heart  ;   and  thence,  through  its  own   subti- lity  and  expansiveness,  permeates  the   entire  organism and  gradually  attacks   and  overwhelms   the   organs   of sense  perception,  dethrones  the  mind  from  her  throne  of reason,  usurps  the  permanent  seat  of  intellect,  and  thus brings  on  intoxication.*     A  man  of  phlegmatic  tempera- ment  (Kapha-prakriti)   can   carry    his   wine  well,   and symptoms   of  intoxication  usually  appear  later  in  him. A     man     of     bilious     temparament     (Pitta     Prakriti\ under    such    circumstances,    gets     easily    intoxicated, while    the     man   whose    temperament   is   marked   by a    predominance     of    Vayu     is     often   found    to     be tipsy  after  his  first  cup.     A   man  of  a  Sattvika  frame  of mind  exhibits   under  the  influence  of  wine,   a   decided predilection  for  fine  dress,  jollity,  and  acts  of  purity  and compassion.     He  sings,  or   reads,  or   evinces   a   strong desire  for  female  company.     A  man  of  a  Rajasika  frame of  mind  becomes   extremely   melancholy   or   pugnaci- ous in   his  cups,   indulges  in   despondent  reveries,   and evinces  suicidal  tendencies  ;  while   wine  in  a  subject   of a  Tamasika  cast  of  mind  exhibits  the  latent  and  innate
*  These   couplets     emphatically   prove     that    the     framers   of  ancient -Ayurveda  were  fully  conversant  with  the  circulation  of  the  blood — Tr,
Chap.  XLV.]  SUTRASTHANAM.
465
vileness  of  his  soul.  Such  a  person  generally  sleeps when  intoxicated,  falsely  boasts  of  his  own  excellence, and  evinces  a  de5ire  for  women  with  whom  connection is  forbidden  by  both  social  and  canonical  laws.
Fermented  liquors  known  as  the  Shukta  (treacle, honey,  fermented  rice  gruel,  and  curd  cream  kept  in  a new  and  clean  vessel  underneath  a  bushel  of  paddy  for three  consecutive  days)  bring  on  an  attack  of  haemoptysis. They  disintegrate  the  lumps  or  knots  of  accumulated Kapham,  are  digestant  and  prove  curative  in  jaundice and  diseases  due  to  the  derangement  of  Kapham.  They are  light  and  vermifugenous,  and  strong  and  heat  making in  their  potency.  They  act  as  diuretic,  are  pleasant,  and pungent  in  digestion.  Bulbs  and  roots  pickled  in  Shukta acquire  the  properties  of  the  latter.  Of  the  Shuktas prepared  with  treacle,  juice  of  sugar-cane,  or  honey,  each preceding  one  should  be  deemed  heavier  and  as  giving rise  to  greater  secretions  of  internal  organs  than  the  one immediately  following  it  in  the  order  of  enumeration.
The  different  kinds  of  fermented  rice  gruel  known  as the  Tushamvu  and  Sauvira  are  pleasant  and  appetising beverages.  They  prove  efficacious  in  cases  of  jaundice, worms  in  the  intestines,  dysentery,  piles,  and  in  diseases affecting  the  heart.  They  are  possessed  of  purgative (Bhedi)  properties.
The  fermented  gruel  known  as  the  Dhanyamlam is  a  good   appetiser  (tonic — D.  R)  owing  to  the  fact 59
^66  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  XLV.
of  its  being  a  preparation  of  paddy.  As  a  plaster,  it alleviates  the  burning  sensation  of  the  skin,  and  as  a potion  it  subdues  the  V^yu  and  Kapliam,  and  alla3's thirst.  Used  as  a  gargle  it  forms  one  of  the  best  remedies for  reducing  Kapham  owing  to  its  keenness.  It  is  light of  digestion,  acts  as  a  deodorant,  removes  the  sense  of exhaustion  and  bad  taste  from  the  mouth,  allays  thirst, acts  as  a  good  appetiser  and  dissolvent,  is  possessed of  purgative  virtues,  and  is  advantageously  used  as  an enemata  (Asthapanam).  It  is  very  wholesome  to  sea- faring men.
The  Urine  Group  :— The  urine  of  cows, buffaloes,  goats,  sheep,  mules,  horses,  and  camels*  are commonly  hot  and  bitter,  and  leave  a  saline  after-taste. They  are  light  and  are  used  as  piu-ifying  agents,  and  will prove  curative  in  diseases  due  to  the  derangement  of  the Vayu  or  Kapham,  as  well  as  in  worms  in  the  intestines, obesity,  poisoning,  abdominal  glands,  piles,  ascites, cutaneous  affections,  oedema,  non-relish  for  food,  and jaundice.  In  general  they  act  as  cardiac  stimulants (Hridyam)  and  appetisers.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  Sub- ject :— They  are  all  pungent,  strong,  hot,  light  and have  a  saline  after-taste.  They  act  as  blood- piu-ifiers or  disinfecting  agents,  reduce  corpulency,  act  as  vermi-
*  The  urine  of  a  cow,  she-buffalo,  ewe  and  she-goat  should  be  taken and  used,  while  similar  secretions  of  the  male  should  be  taken  where man,  camel  and  elephant  should  be  indicated.
Chap.  XLV.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  467
fiiges  and  are  anti-toxic.  They  subdue  the  deranged  Vayu and  Kapham.  They  prove  beneficial  in  cases  of  piles, ascites,  abdominal  tumours,  oedema  and  non- relish  for food.  They  prove  beneficial  in  jaundice,  and  act  as cardiac  stimulants,  and  are  possessed  of  appetising, purgative  and  stomachic  virtues.
The  urine  of  a  cow  is  pungent,  strong  and  hot,  and does  not  generate  Vayu  on  account  of  its  being  saturated with  alkali.  It  is  light,  stomachic,  slightly  generates the  Pittam^  and  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  It proves  beneficial  in  cases  of  colic,  abdominal  glands, ascites  and  distention  of  the  abdomen,  and  is  used  for the  purposes  of  purging  and  enematas  (Asthdpananr.  In cases,  which  prove  amenable  to  the  use  of  urine,  the urine  of  a  cow  should  be  used  to  the  exclusion  of  that of  any  other  animal,  even  to  that  of  an  ox.
The  urine  of  a  (she)  baffalo  proves  beneficial  in piles,  abdominal  dropsy,  colic,  cutaneous  affections, Meha,  imperfect  action  of  emetics  or  purgatives, constipation,  oedema,  abdominal  glands,  and  jaundice.
The  urine  of  a  (she)  goat  has  a  pungent,  bitter taste.  It  slighly  agitates  the  bodily  Vayu  and  proves curative  in  cases  of  cough,  dyspnoea,  consumption, jaundice  and  chlorosis.  The  urine  of  a  ewe  contains alkali,  and  has  a  bitter  pungent  taste.  It  subdues  the deranged  Vayu,  and  is  heat-making  in  its  potency. It  proves  beneficial  in  cough,  enlarged   spleen,   abdomi-
468  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.  [  Chap.  XLV.
nal  dropsy,  dyspnoea,  consumption  and  in  obstinate  con- stipation of  the  bowels.  The  urine  of  a  horse  is appetising  and  pungent  in  taste,  strong^  and  heat-making in  its  potency.  It  subdues  the  deranged  V^yu  and Kapha'm,  and  cures  mental  aberrations.  It  is  usuall}^ recommended  in  cases  of  ringworm  and  worms  in the  intestines.  The  urine  of  an  elephant  has  a  bitter and  saline  taste.  It  is  keen  and  purgative,  and  subdues the  Vayu  and  enrages  the  Pittam.  It  is  commonly used  in  the  treatment  of  (KiUsa)  leucoderma  and in  the  preparation  of  alkalies.
The  urine  of  an  ass  tends  to  neutralise  the  effects of  poison  generated  through  the  chemical  action  of two  different  substances  in  the  organism.  It  is  strong and  proves  curative  in  cases  of  chronic  d5'sentery.  It is  a  vermifuge  and  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Kapham, and  is  appetising.  The  urine  of  a  camel  proves beneficial  in  cases  of  oedema,  leprosy,  abdominal dropsy,  insanitv,  worms  in  the  intestines,  piles  and in  diseases  due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu. Human  urine  is   strong  anti-toxic.
I  have  now  briefly  described  the  properties  of  all kinds  of  liquid  food  or  drink.  An  experienced  physician should  prescribe  them  for  the  use  of  his  king  according to  the  nature  of  season  and  the  country  in  which  they are  to  be  applied.
Thus  ends  tlie  forty-fifth  Chapter  of   the  Sutrasthanam  in   the  Sushruta Samhitd  which  treats  of  liquids.
CHAPTER    XLVI.
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  Chapter  which treats  of  food  and  drink  (Annapa'na-Vid'hi- madhya'yam).
Having  made  obeisance  to  the  holy  Dhanvantari, Sushruta  said : — "You  have  stated  before  that  food determines  the  origin  of  beings  and  forms  the  chief source  of  their  bodily  strength  and  complexion,  as  well as  of  the  albuminous  (Ojas)  principle  in  their  organisms. Food  primarily  depends  upon  the  six  different tastes.  Moreover  tastes  are  inherent  in  substances. Again  the  substances,  with  their  specific  tastes, virtues,  potencies  and  reactionary  or  chemical transformations,  tend  to  diminish  or  increase  the deranged  humours  and  the  fundamental  principles  of  the body,  as  also  to  bring  about  a  normal  equilibrium amongst  them.  Food  is  the  primary  cause  of  the  origin, continuance  and  dissolution  even  of  such  beings  as the  divine  Brahma,  etc.  Life  is  impossible  without food.  Food  is  the  source  of  the  growth,  strength,  and healthful  glow  of  organic  beings.  It  is  food  that imparts  strength  to  the  organs  of  sense  and  makes  them operative  in  their  respective  fields  of  action.  It  is irregularity  (Vaishamya)  of  diet  which  brings  about ill-health.     Diet  may  be  divided  into  four  kinds  such  as^
470  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.  [Chap.  XLVI.
solid  food,  (Ashitha)  drink,  Leedham  (food  taken  by licking),  and  the  Kh^ditam  (food  that  is  chewn  and assimilated  only  for  the  enjoyment  of  a  specific taste).  A  variety  of  substances  enters  into  the composition  of  our  food,  which  admit  of  being grouped  under  various  preparations  and  necessarily involve  the  co-operation  of  a  large  number  of  dynamic- al forces.  I  am  eager  to  learn  of  the  substances  and their  specific  inherent  properties,  virtues,  potencies  and transfonnations  (chemical  reactions)  which  constitute the  daily  food  of  human  beings,  inasmuch  as  a  physician, who  is  ignorant  of  them,  is  quite  helpless  in  checking or  curing  any  distemper  and  maintaining  health  in  indivi- duals. And  since  food  (diet)  determines  the  origin  of all  created  beings,  instruct  us,  O  Lord,  on  the  proper regimen  of  food  and  drink."
The  holy  Dhanvantari,  thus  addressed  by  Sushruta, replied  as  follows : — "O  child,  hear  me  discourse on  the  proper  regulation  of  food  and  drink  as requested  by  you.  There  are  several  species  of Shall  rice  such  as,  the  Lohitaka,  Shdli,  Kalama,  Karda- maka,  Panduka,  Sugandhaka,  Shakunahrita,  Pushpdn- daka,  Pundarika,  Mahashali,  Shita-Bhiruka,  Rodhra- Pushpaka,  Dirghashuka,  Kanchanaka,  Mahisha-mastaka, Hayanaka,  Dushaka,  and  Mah^-Dushaka  etc.
IVIetrical  Texts— The  several  species  of Shall   rice  are   sweet   in     taste,   cooling    in     potency,
Chap.  XLVL]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  47 1
light  of  digestion,  and  impart  strength  to  those  who  use them.  They  subdue  the  Pittam  and  shghtly  generate Vayu  and  Kaphara.  They  are  demulcent  and  tend  to constipate  the  bowels  and  reduce  the  quantity  of  fecal matter.  Of  these  the  red  species  (Lohitaka)  is  the  most efficacious,  and  subdues  the  deranged  humours.  It  is diuretic,  spermatopoietic,  refrigerant,  eye-invigorating, cosmetic,  tonic  and  pleasant.  It  improves  the  voice. Its  efficacy  has  been  witnessed  in  cases  of  fever and  ulcer,  and  in  all  other  diseases.  It  is  a  good  dis- infectant and  anti-toxic.  The  other  species  differ  a little  in  their  properties  from  the  preceding  one  and are  successively  inferior  in  quality  in  their  order  of enumeration.
Shashtika  Group  : — The  several  species  of Shashtika,  K^nguka,  Mukundaka,  Peetaka,  Pramodaka, Kdkalaka,  Asana-Pushpaka,  Mah^-Shashthika,  Churnaka, Kiu-avaka,  and  the  Kedar^ka,  etc.
IVIetrical  Texts  : — They  (Shashtikas)  are  sweet in  taste  and  digestion,  and  pacify  the  V^yu  and  the Kapham.  Their  properties  are  somewhat  identical  with those  of  Shali  rice  inasmuch  as  they  are  constructive, tonic  and  spermatopoietic,  and  increase  the  Kapham. The  Shashtika  is  pre-eminently  the  most  efficacious  of all  the  other  species,  and  leaves  an  astringent  after-taste in  the  mouth.  It  is  light,  mild,  demulcent  and  imparts Strength  and  firmness  to  the  body.     It  is  astringent  and
472
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.'     [Chap.  XLVI.
sweet  in  digestion,  and  exhibits  properties  similar  to those  of  the  red  Shali.  The  remaining  varieties  are inferior  in  quality,  each  succeeding  one  being  inferior  to the  one  immediately  following  it.
Vrihi  Dha'nyas  :— The  several  species  of Vrihis  are  known  as  the  Krishna- Vrihi,  Shalamukha, Jatumukha,  Nandimukha,  Lavakshaka,  Taritaka, Kukkutandaka,  Par^vataka,  and  the  Patala,  etc.
Metrical  Texts  :— They  have  a  sweet  and astringent  taste,  are  sweet  of  digestion  and  hot  in  their potencies.  They  tend  to  slightly  increase  the  secretions of  the  internal  organs  and  bring  on  constipation  of  the bowels.  Their  general  properties  are  nearly  identical with  those  of  the  aforesaid  Shashtikas.  The  species Krishna- Vrihi  is  the  best  of  them  all.  It  is  hght, and  leaves  an  astringent  after  taste,  the  remaining varieties  gradually  deteriorating  in  quality  from  the one  under  discussion.
Shali  rice,  grown  on  burnt  land,  is  light  of  digestion, has  an  astringent  taste,  is  parchifying,  tends  to  suppress the  emission  of  urine  and  the  evacuation  of  stool,  and reduces  the  deranged  Kapham.  Sh^li  rice  grown  in  a J^ngala  country  has  a  taste  slightly  blended  of  the pungent,  astringent,  sweet  and  has  a  shade  of  bitter.  It subdues  the  deranged  Pittam  and  Kapham,  (generates Vayu  — D.  R.)  and  is  a  good  digestant  and  stomachic. Shali  rice  grown  in  a  Kaidara  or  marshy  country  has  a
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
473
sweet  taste  with  a  shade  of  the  astringent.  It  is  tonic and  spermatopoietic,  aphro  disiac  and  heavy  of  diges- tion.  It  reduces  the  quantity  of  excrement,  subdues the  Pittam,  and  increases  the  Kapham.
»
Rice  of  once  transplanted  paddy  plants  (Ropya)  or of  those  transplanted  several  times  in  succession  (Ati- ropya)  is  light,  easily  digested  and  comparatively  more efficacious.  It  acts  as  a  constructive  tonic  and  is  not followed  by  any  reactionary  acidity  after  digestion. It  destroys  the  deranged  humours  and  is  diuretic.  Rice  of paddy  plants,  sprouting  Irom  the  stubbles  of  a  previous harvest,  is  parchifying.  It  suppresses  the  evacuations  of stool,  has  a  bitter  and  astringent  taste,  subdues  the Pittam,  is  easily  digestible  and  generates  Kapham.  I have  fully  described  the  good  and  bad  species  of  grain belonging  to  the  Sh^li  group.  Similarly,  I  shall  speak of  Kudh^nyas,  Mudgas  and  Mashas,  etc.
The  Genus  Kudhariya  :— The  several varieties  of  Kudhanyam  are  known  as  the  Kora- dushaka,  Shyamaka,  Niv^ra,  Shantanu,  Varaka, Udd^laka,  Priyangu,  Madhulik^,  Nandimukhi,  Kura- vinda,  Gavedhuka,  Varuka,  Todaparni,  Mukundaka, and  Venu-yava,  etc.
Metrical  Texts  :— They  generate  heat  and have  a  sweet  and  astringent  taste.  They  are  parchifj'-- ing  and  pungent  of  digestion,  subdue  the  Kapham  and
60
474  THE  SUSHUUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XLVI.
tend  to  produce  retention  of  the  urine,  and  enrage  the bodily  V^yu  and  the  Pittam.  Of  these  the  species  known as  the  Kodrava,  Nivara,  Shyamdka  and  Sh^ntanu  have  a sweet  and  astringent  taste  and  prove  curative  in  Sheeta pitta* (urticaria).  The  four  (black,  red,  yellow  and  white) varieties  of  Priyangus  reduce  the  Kapham  and produce  a  parched  condition  in  the  body,  each  preceding species  being  superior  as  regards  its  virtues  to  the  one immediatel)'  following  it  in  the  order  of  enumeration. The  species  Madhulikas  as  well  as  the  one  known  as  the Nandimukhi  is  sweet,  cool  and  demulcent.  The  species Varuka  and  Mukundaka  are  largely  possessed  of absorbing  virtues.  The  species  Venu-yava,  is  parchify- ing,  and  heat-making  in  its  potency  and  is  pungent  of digestion,  brings  on  retention  of  the  urine,  subdues the  deranged  Kapham,  and  tends  to  enrage  the  bodily Vayu.  The  several  varieties  of  pulse  (Vaidala)  commonly used  as  food  are  known  as  the  Mudga,  Vana-Mudga, Kalaya,  Makushtha,  Masura,  Mangalya,  Chanaka, Satina,  Triputa,  Harenu,  and  Adhaki,  etc.
IVIetrical  Texts:— They  are  generally  cool  and pungent  of  digestion,  and  have  a  sweet  and  astringent taste.  They  generate  the  Vayu,  arrest  the  flow of  urine  and  the  evacuation  of  stool,  and  subdue the  Pittam  and  Kapham.  The  species  known as  the  Mudga  does  not  excessivel}'  generate  Vayu in  the  system  but  tends  to   purify   and  invigorate   the
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  475
organ  of  vision.  The  green  species  is  the  best  of  all the  varieties  of  Mudga  pulse.  The  properties  of Vanya  (Mudga)  are  similar  to  those  of  the  common variet}'.
The  species  of  pulse  known  as  Masura  is  sweet  of digestion  and  constipates  the  bowels.  The  species Makushthaka  is  vermigenous,  while  the  species  Kalaya generates  Vayu  copiously.  The  species  Adhaki  subdues the  Pittam  and  Kapham,  and  does  not  excessively agitate  the  V^yu  in  the  organism.  The  species  known as  the  Chanaka  generates  Vayu  and  is  cooling  in  its potency.  It  has  a  sweet  and  astringent  taste,  and produces  a  parched  condition  of  the  body.  It  subdues the  Pittam  and  Kapham,  corrects  the  deranged blood,  and  tends  to  bring  on  a  loss  of  the  virile  powers. The  species  known  as  Satina  and  Harenu  are  astring- ent in  their  virtues  and  tend  to  constipate  the  bowels. All  the  varieties  of  pulse  except  the  Mudga  and  the Masura  tend  to  produce  a  distension  of  the  abdomen caused  by  gas  or  air  in  the  organism  (Tympanites  or Adhm^na).
The  pulse  known  as  the  Masha  has  a  sweet  taste, is  heavy  and  pleasant,  laxative,  diuretic,  demulcent, heat-making,  aphrodisiac,  and  specifically  sperma- topoietic,  tonic  and  galactogoguic.  It  subdues  the Vayu  and  increases  the  Kapham.  The  species  known as  the  Alasandra  (Rajamasha)  does  not  produce  Kapham
476  THE  SUSHRtJTA  SAMHITA.  [  Chap.  XLVI.
and  is  neither  laxative  nor  diuretic  on  account  of  its astringent  nature.  It  is  sweet  in  taste  and  of  digestion, pleasant,  glactogoguic  and  improves-'a  relish  for  food. The  properties  of  Atmagupta  and  Kakanda  seeds  are similzir  to  those  of  the  aforesaid  Masha  pulse.  The species  known  as  the  Aranya-masha  is  astringent  in taste,  produces  a  condition  of  parchedness  in  the system,  and  is  not  followed  by  any  reactionary^  acidity after  being  digested.  The  pulse  known  as  Kulattha has  an  astringent  taste,  is  pungent  of  digestion  and  is possessed  of  astringent  properties.  It  proves  cura- tive in  cases  of  urinary  calculi  arising  from  seminal derangement  (Shukr^shmari),  abdominal  glands,  catarrh, and  cough.  The  species  known  as  the  Vanya-Kulattha subdues  the  deranged  Kapham,  and  proves  curative  in cases  of  Anaha,  obesity,  piles,  hic-cough  and  dyspnoea. It  may  bring  on  an  attack  of  hoemoptysis,  and  proves beneficial  in  diseases  affecting  the  eyes.  Tilam  has  a taste  blended  of  the  sweet  and  the  bitter  with  a  shade  of the  astringent.  It  is  astrigent,  heat-making,  and  produces Pittam.  It  is  sweet  of  digestion,  demulcent,  tonic, and  curative  as  a  plaster  for  ulcers.  It  is  bene- fiicial  to  the  skin  and  teeth,  improves  the  intellect and'digestion,  is  anuretic  and  heavy,  helps  the  growth of  hair,  and  subdues  the  deranged  Vdyu.
Of  all  the  different  varieties  of  sesamum,    the  black species   is  the   best  in  respect  of  efficacy.     The  white
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  477
species  occupies  a  middle  position  as  regards  its  virtues, while  the  remaining  varieties  should  be  regarded  as  of inferior  quality.    *
Barley  (Yava)  is  cooling,  sweet  and  astringent  in taste,  and  pungent  of  digestion.  It  subdues  the  deranged Pittam  and  Kapham.  It  is  anuretic,  beneficial  to  ulcers  ; and  like  sesamum,  increases  the  quantity  of  stool  and the  emission  of  flatus,  imparts  firmness  to  the  body and  improves  the  voice,  complexion  and  digestion. It  is  slini}^  and  produces  a  condition  of  extreme parchedness  in  the  system,  removes  obesity,  and  subdues fat.  It  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu,  is  refrigerant  and soothes  (purifies)  the  blood  and  Pittam.  The  Atiyavas (a  species  of  barle}^)  is  inferior  to  the  barley  species  in respect  of  the  preceding  qualities.
Wheat  is  sweet,  heavy,  tonic,  rejuvicient,  sperma- topoietic,  and  improves  the  relish  for  food.  It  is demulcent  and  extremely  cooling,  subdues  the  Vayu and  Pittam,  and  generates  the  Kapham.  New  wheat  is laxative  and  brings  about  the  adhesion  of  fractured bones  or  helps  fermentation  (SandhanakritJ.
The  Shimvas  (Beans)  have  an  astringent  taste  and produce  a  condition  of  parchedness  in  the  S3'stem. They  are  antitoxic,  discutient,  and  reduce  the  Kapham and  the  power  of  sight.  They  are  imperfectly  digested and    acquire    a     pungent    taste   in   digestion,   though
478  THE  StiSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap:  XLVt."
ordinarily  sweet   in  taste.    They   cause   evacuation   of the  bowels  and  emission  of  flatus.
There  are  four  variteies  of  Shimva  such  as,  the  white, the  black,  the  yellow  and  the  red,  of  which  each preceding  species  is  superior  in  virtues  and  qualities  to the  one  immediately  following  it  in  the  order  of enumeration.  The  Shimvas  are  heat-making  and pungent  both  in  taste  and  digestion.
The  two  varieties  of  Saha,  as  well  as  the  species  of beans  known  as  the  Mulakashimvi  and  the  Kushimvi, are  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion,  and  strength-giving. They  tend  to  subdue  the  action  of  the  deranged Pittam.
Raw  and  unripe  pulse  beans  (Vaidilika  Shimvi) produce  a  condition  of  extreme  parchedness  in  the system,  are  long  retained  in  the  stomach  and  but  imper- fectly digested.  They  are  relishing  but  can  be  digested only  with  the  greatest  difficulty,  causing  the  stomach to  distend  before  being  digested.
Kusumbha  seeds  are  pungent  in  taste  and digestion,  and  reduce  the  deranged  Kapham.  They are  extremel)*  unwholesome,  owing  to  the  fact  of their  being  imperfectly  digested.  Linseed  fAtasi) has  a  sweet  taste,  is  heat-making  in  its  potency,  and pungent  in  digestion.  It  generates  the  Pittam  and subdues  the  Vayu.   White  mustard  'Shveta  Sarshapa)  is
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM,
479
pungent  in  taste  and  digestion,  strong  and  heat- making in  its  potency.  It  gives  rise  to  a  condition  of  parchedness in  the  system,  and'diminishes  the  Vayuand  the  Kapham. An  excessive  and  continuous  use  of  white  mustard may  bring  on  an  attack  of  haemoptysis.  The  properties of  red  mustard  seeds  are  similar  to  those  of  the  white species.
A  crop  of  Dhdnyam  grown  in  an  unnatural  season, or  in  any  way  diseased  or  blighted,  or  gleaned  before  it has  ripened,  as  well  as  the  one  raised  from  a  soil naturally  uncongenial  to  its  growth,  or  recently  harvest- ed, should  be  deemed  to  be  of  inferior  quality.
'The  use  of  new  (harvested  within  a  year)  rice  tends to  increase  the  secretions  of  the  internal  organs,  while that  of  a  year's  maturity  is  light.*
Rice  threshed  out  of  paddy,  which  has  commenced sprouting,  is  heavy,  and  is  long  retained  in  the  stomach. It  can  be  but  imperfectly  digested  and  tends  to  affect the  organ  of  vision.
The  maturity,  preparations  (Sanskara),  and  measures of  corn  from  Shili  rice  to  mustard  seeds  described in  the  present  Chapter  are  as  follows  : — [Rice  of  two years  standing  should  be  regarded  as  well  matured  in time  and  excellent  in  quality.    A  thing,  which  is  hard  to
*  Rice  of  more  than  two  years  standing  becomes  divested  of  all  its nutritive  elements.
480  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLVI.^
digest  like  Vrihi,  is  made  light  by  frying.  Measures for  use  should  vary  according  to  the  keenness  of  one's appetite.]
The  meat  Group  :— Now  I  shall  de^-cribe the  properties  of  the  different  species  of  edible  meats. The  flesh  of  animals  such  as  those  which  are aquatic  in  their  habits  (Jaleshaya),  or  frequent  marshy lands  (Anupa),  or  dwell  in  villages  (Gramya),  or  are carnivorous  in  their  habits  (Kra\yabhuja},  or  are  pos- sessed of  unbifurcated  hoofs  (Ekashapha),  or  dwell  on high  ground  (Jangala),  is  generally  used  as  food.  Of these  each  succeeding  kind  is  superior  to  the  one immediately  preceding  it  in  the  order  of  enumeration.
Again  these  animals  may  be  roughly   grouped  under
two  broad  sub-heads  such  as,  the  Jangala  (living  in  high
ground   and   in   a  jungle)   and  the   Anupa   (living    in
marshy  places,  or  near  pools  and  water- courses).  The Jangala   group   may    be   further    divided    into    eight
sub-species,  such  as    the  Janghala,  the    Viscira,  the
Pratnda,  the  Guhashaya,  the  Pra8aha,the  Parnamriga,
the  Vileshaya,  and  the  Gramya.  Of  these  the  Janghala
and  the  Viscira  are  the  most   important.    The  following
animals  belong  to  the  Janghala  (large-kneed  group — viz.
the   Ena  (black  deer),  the  Harina  (red  deer),  the  Rishya
(blue     deer),     the     Kuranga   (antelope\    the     Karala,
the     Kritam^la,   the   Sharabha,    the   Shvadanstra,    the
Prishata,   the  Chitrila  (Spotted   deer),  the  Ch^rushka,
Chap.  XLVI.J  SUTRASTHANAM.  481
the  Mriga-m^trika,  etc.  These  species  of  venison  have a  sweet  and  astringent  taste,  are  hght,  keen,  pleasant (palatable),  laxative,  and  diuretic  in  their  effect.  They subdue  the  Vayu  and  the  Pittam.
IVIetrical  Text  :— The  venison  of  the*  Ena species  is  sweet  and  astringent  in  taste,  and  palatable, and  proves  curative  in  diseases  due  to  the  deranged condition  of  the  Pittam,  blood  and  Kapham.  It  is  astrin- gent in  its  effect,  imparts  strength  to  the  system, improves  a  relish  for  food  and  is  a  febrifuge. The  venison  of  the  Harina  (red)  species  is  sweet in  taste  and  digestion,  appetising,  aromatic,  cool, light,  and  suppresses  the  discharge  of  stool  and urine  and  pacifies  the  deranged  humours.  Deer which  are  black  are  called  Ena,  while  those  which  are red  are  called  Harina.  Those,  that  are  neither  red  nor black,  are  designated  as  Kuranga.  The  venison of  the  Mriga-matrik^  species  is  cooling  and  proves curative  in  cases  of  haemoptysis,  Sannipata  diseases (due  to  the  concerted  action  of  the  three  deranged humours),  consumption,  dyspncea,  cough,  and  hiccough and  creates  a  relish  for  food.
Birds  such  as  the  Lava,  Tittiri,  Kapinjala,  Vartira, Vartika,  Vartaka,  Naptrika,  V^tika_,  Chakora,  Kala- vinka,  Mayura,  Krakara,  Upachakra,  Kukkuta,  S^ranga, Shata-Patraka,  Kutittiri,  Kuruvahuka  and  Yavalaka belong  to  the  Vishkira  species.     [They  are   so  called
61
482  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.         [Chap.  XLVI.
from  the  fact  of  their  pickmg  up  their  food after  scattering  it  first  with  their  bills  and  claws (Skr.  kira,  to  scatter)].  The  flesh  of  a  bird  of this  group  is  light,  cooling,  sweet  and  astringent in  taste  and  tends  to  pacify  the  deranged  humours of  the  body.
The  flesh  of  the  Lava  is  light,  has  a  sweet  and astringent  taste,  is  pungent  of  digestion,  and possessed  of  astringent  and  appetising  properties. It  is  highly  efficacious  in  diseases  due  to  the  concerted humours  of  the  body.  The  flesh  of  the  Tittirs  is slightly  heavy,  heat-making  and  sweet  in  taste.  It  is spermatopoietic,  appetising  and  astringent.  It  improves the  intellect  and  complexion,  and  subdues  the  three deranged  humours.  The  flesh  of  the  yellow  (Gaura) Tittiri  proves  curative  in  hic-cough  and  dyspnoea, and  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu.  The  flesh  of  the Kapinjala  is  light  and  cooling,  and  proves  curative in  cases  of  haemoptysis,  and  is  recommended in  diseases  brought  about  through  the  deranged condition  of  the  Kapham  or  V^yu  (Manda-vata\ The  flesh  of  the  Krakara  or  of  the  Upachakra is  light,  pleasant  (palatable),  spermatopoietic,  and appetising.  It  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Pittam  and impro^■es  the  intellect.  The  flesh  of  the  Mayura  is astringent  and  saline  in  taste,  and  is  beneficial  to  the skin,   helps  the   growth   of  hair,   improves  the   voice.
Chap.  XLVi  ]  SUtRASTHANAM.  4^3
intellect,    appetite   and  relish    for    food,   and    imparts strength  and  vigour  to  the  organs  of  sight  and  hearing.
The  flesh  of  a  wild  cock  is  demulcent,  heat-making, and  spermatopoietic.  It  acts  as  a  diaphoretic,  imparts tone  to  the  voice  and  the  organism,  subdues  the deranged  Vayu,  and  is  useful  as  a  good  constructive tonic.  The  flesh  of  a  domesticated  cock  or  fowl  is possessed  of  properties  similar  to  those  of  its  wild prototype  with  the  exception  that  it  is  hea^  y,  and proves  curative  in  rheumatism,  consumption,  vomiting and  chronic  (Vishama-Jvara)  fever.
Birds  such  as  the  dove,  pigeon  Bhringaraja, cuckoo,  Koyashtica,  Kulinga,  the  domestic  Kulinga, Gokshada,  Dindimanaka,  Shatapatraka,  Matrinindaka, Bhedashi,  Shuka,  Sharika,  Valguli,  Girisha,  Alahva, Dushaka,  Sugrihi,  Khanjaritaka,  Harita,  Datyuha,  etc. belong  to  the  group  known  as  the  Pratuda.
Metrical  Texts  :— The  Pratudas  live  on  fruit, and  their  flesh  has  a  sweet  and  astringent  taste. It  generates  Vayu  and  produces  a  parched  condition in  the  organism.  It  is  cooling  in  its  potency  and reduces  the  Pittam  and  Kapham.  It  suppresses  the discharge  of  urine  and  reduces  the  quantity  of  stool. Of  these  the  flesh  of  the  Bhedashi  tends  to  vitiate the  humours  and  to  derange  the  three  excrements  of the  body.  The  flesh  of  the  Kana  Kapota  (wild  dove; is   heavy   and   has   a   palatable,    saline   and  astringent
484  't'HE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XLVl.
taste.  It  proves  beneficial  in  hasmoptysis  and  is  sweet of  digestion.  The  flesh  of  the  Kulinga  is  sweet, demulcent,  and  spermatopoietic,  and  iiicreases  the  bodily Kapham.  The  flesh  of  the  domesticated  Kulinga  is highly  spermatopoietic,  and  proves  curative  in  cases  of haemoptysis.
Animals  such  as  the  Hon,  tiger,  wolf,  hyena arboreal  leopard  (Vriksha  dipi\  cat,  jackal,  bear, and  jVIrigaervaruka  (a  jackal-shaped,  deer-eating  species of  tiger)  belong  to  the  group  of  the  Guh^shayas (cave- dwelling  mammals).
IVIetrical  Texts  : — The  flesh  of  animals  belong- ing to  this  family  is  sweet,  heavy,  demulcent and  strength- giving.  It  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu. It  is  heat-making  in  its  potency,  and  proves  beneficial in  diseases  affecting  the  eyes  and  anus.
The  Prasaha  Group  :— Birds  such  as, the  Kaka,  Kanka,  Kurura,  Chasa,  Bhasa,  Shashaghati, Uluka,  Chilli,  Shyena,  Gridhra,  etc.  belong  to  the family  of  Prasahas  (Carnivorous  birds  that  suddenly dart  on  their  prey).
Metrical  Text  :— The  flesh  of  birds  belonging to  this  group  is  identical  in  its  virtues,  potency, taste  and  digestive  transformation  with  those  of the  aforesaid  carnivorous  mammals,  such  as  the  lion, etc.,  and  is  specially  beneficial  in  cases  of  consumption and  kindred  wasting  diseases.
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  485
The  Parna-IVIriga  Group  :— Animals  such as  tlie  Madgu,  the  arboreal  Musika,  the  Vriksha-Shayika, Avakusha,  Puti-gKasa  and  the  Vanara,  etc.  belong  to  the family  of  Parna-Mrigas  (lit  :  tree-dwelling  arboreal animals).
Metrical  Texts  :— The  flesh  of  animals  of this  group  is  sweet,  spermatopoietic  and  heavy of  digestion.  It  is  invigorating  to  the  eyesight  and beneficial  in  cases  of  consumption.  It  is  laxative  and diuretic  and  cures  cough,  pile  and  dyspnoea.
The  Vileshaya  Group :— Animals  such as,  the  Shvavit,  Shalyaka,  Godha,  Shasha,  Vrishadansha, Lopaka,  Lomasha-Karna,  Kadali,  Mriga-Priyaka, Ajagara,  Sarpa,  Mushika,  Nakula  and  Maha-Vabhru belong  to  the  group  of  Vileshaya  (hole-dwellers).
Metrical  Texts  :^The  general  properties  of the  flesh  of  animals  belonging  to  this  species are  to  increase  the  consistency  of  stool  and  urine. They  are  heat-making  in  potency,  sweet  in  digestion  as those  of  the  preceding  group.  The}-  subdue  the  Vayu and  generate  the  Pittam  and  Kapham.  They  are demulcent  and  beneficial  in  cough,  dyspnoea  and cachexia.  The  flesh  of  the  Shasha  is  sweet  and  astringent in  taste.  It  reduces  the  Pittam  and  Kapham  and neither  produces  nor  subdues  the  Vayu  owing  to its  moderately  cooling  potency.  The  flesh  of  the  Godha is  sweet  of  digestion  and  has  a  pungent,  astringent  taste.
486  THE  SUSHRUtA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XLVI.
It  is  tonic  and  constructive  and  pacifies  the  Vayu  and Pittam.  The  flesh  of  the  Shalyaka  is  tasteful, light  of  digestion,  cooling  in  its  potency  and  anti-toxic, and  subdues  the  deranged  Pittam.  The  flesh  of  the Mrigii-Priyaka  proves  a  wholesome  diet  in  diseases due  to  the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu  ( Vayu-Roga), while  that  of  the  Ajagara  is  beneficial  in  piles.
The  flesh  of  a  Sarpa  (a  species  other  than  those specifically  described)  is  curative  in  piles  and  derange- ments of  the  Vayu.  It  is  a  vermifuge  and  anti-toxic  (a neutraliser  of  chemical  or  resulting  poisons).  It  in- vigorates the  eye-sight,  is  appetising  and  sweet and  improves  the  intellect.  Of  these  the  flesh  of  the Darvicara  is  appetising,  pungent  in  digestion,  sweet  in taste,  and  extremely  efficacious  in  ej^e  diseases.  It  is laxative  and  diuretic,  and  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu.
Domestic     Animal      Group  :— Animals
such  as  horses,  mules,  cows,  bullocks,  asses,  camels, goats,  sheep,  and  Medapuchhas  (fat  tailed  or  Turkish sheep)  etc.,  belong  to  the  group  of  domestic  animals (Gr^myas).
IVIctrical  Texts  :— The  flesh  of  domestic animals  is  possessed  of  constructive,  tonic  and appetising  properties,  is  sweet  in  taste  and  diges- tion. It  destro5's  the  deranged  Vayu  and  produces  the Kapham   and   Pittam.   Of  these  the  flesh  of  the  goat  is
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
487
moderately  cooling  in  its  potenc}^  does  not  increase  the secretions  of  the  internal  organs,  is  heavy  and  demul- cent, subdues  the'Pittam  and  the  Kapham,  and  is  bene- ficial in  nasal  catarrh.  The  flesh  of  sheep  (mutton)  is constructive,  tonic  and  heav)',  and  generates  the Pittam  and  Kapham.  The  flesh  of  the  Medapuchcha is  aphrodisiac  and  has  properties  similar  to  those of  mutton.
Beef  is  holy  and  refrigerant,  proves  curative  in dyspnoea^  catarrh,  cough^  chronic  fever  and  in  cases of  a  morbid  craving  for  food  (Atyagni),  and  destroys the  deranged  Vayu.  The  flesh  of  an  animal  with unbifurcated  hoofs  (Ekashapha  such  as,  the  horse  and the  mule  etc.),  has  a  slightly  saline  taste,  and  is  possess- ed of  properties  similar  to  those  of  mutton.  The  flesh of  an  animal  belonging  to  the  Jangala  group  is  said to  increase  the  secretions  of  the  internal  organs.
The  flesh  of  beasts  or  birds  dwelling  remote  from  a village  or  pool  tends  to  slightly  increase  the  secretions of  the  internal  organs,  while  the  flesh  of  an  animal living  in  a  village  or  near  a  reservoir  of  water,  ex- cessively increases  that  secretion.
The  Anupa  Group  -.—Animals,  which  are generally  found  to  frequent  marshy  places  (Anupas) may  be  divided  into  five  groups,  such  as,  the  Kulacharas (frequenting  the  shores    of  pools  and  lakes),   Plavas
488  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLVI.
(divers  or  swimmers),  Koshastha  (conchiferous  aquatic animals  such  as,  the  molluscs  etc.),  the  Fadinas and  the  (piscatory)  Matsya.
Of  these,  the  elephant,  the  Gavaya,  buffalo, Ruru  (an  animal  of  the  deer  species  which  casts  its antlers  and  wanders  roaming  about  in  the  forests  in autumn)  Chamara,  Srimara  (an  animal  of  the  Zebra species  with  gi'een  and  red  stripes),  Rohita  (red deer),  boar,  rhinoceros,  Gokarna,  K^lapuchchaka, together  with  the  Nynku  (a  species  of  antlered  deer) and  the  wild  cow,  etc.,  frequent  the  cool  shores df  swamps  and  lakes,  and  are  accordingly  included within  the  group  of  Kulacharas  (shore-dwellers).
The  Metrical  Texts  :— The  flesh  of  an animal  of  this  group  is  spermatopoietic  and destroys  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham.  It  is  sweet  in taste  and  digestion,  cooling,  tonic,  demulcent  and diuretic,  and  increases  the  quantity  of  Kapham.
The  flesh  of  the  Elephant  tends  to  produce  a  state of  extreme  parchedness  in  the  system,  and  is  lique- facient  and  heat-making  in  its  potency.  It  vitiates the  Pittam  and  has  a  palatable  acid  and  saline  taste, and  destroys  the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  The  flesh  of the  Gavaya  is  demulcent  and  sweet  in  taste,  and  proves beneficial  in  cough  and  is  sweet  of  digestion.  It  tends to  increase  sexual  capacity.  The  flesh  of  the  Buffalo is   demulcent,   heat-making  (in     its    potency),     sweet.
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
489
spermatopoietic,  pleasant  and  heavy  of  digestion  It increases  strength  and  virihty  and  imparts  firmness  to the  tissues,  and  "is  hypnotic  and  galactagoguic.  The flesh  of  the  Rum  is  shghtly  sweet  and  leaves  an astringent  after  taste.  It  is  heavy,  spermatopoietjc  and pacifies  the  Vayu  and  Kapham.
Similarly,  the  flesh  of  the  Chamara  is  demulcent, cures  an  attack  of  cough,  is  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion and  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Pittam.  The  flesh of  the  Srimara  is  heavy  and  spermatopoietic,  leaves  an astringent  after-taste  in  the  mouth  and  tends  to  subdue the  deranged  Vayu  and  Pittam.  The  flesh  of  the  boar (Baraha)  or  common  pig  is  constructive,  tonic,  sperma- topoietic and  diaphoretic,  and  imparts  a  greater  strength to  the  system.  It  is  heavy  (as  regards  digestion),  demul- cent, cooling,  refrigerant,  and  pleasant,  and  destroys  the deranged  Va)^.  The  flesh  of  the  rhinoceros  has  an  as- tringent taste,  and  is  pleasing  to  one's  departed  manes  in the  shape  of  an  oblation  (Pitryam).  It  is  sacred,  imparts longevity,  tends  to  suppress  the  discharge  of  urine, produces  a  condition  of  parchedness  in  the  organism,  and destroys  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham.  The  flesh of  the  Gokarna  is  sweet,  demulcent,  mild  (soft),  sweet in  digestion  and  proves  curative  in  cases  of  haemoptysis, and  generates  Kapham  in  the  system.
The     Plava     Croup  :— Birds    such    as    the 62
490  '^^^-  SUSHKUTA  SAMHITA'.       i  Chap.  XLVI.
Hansa,  Sarasa,  Kraimcha,  Chakravaka,  Kurura  (belong also  to  the  Prasaha  group)  Kadamva,  Karandava, Jivan  Jivaka,  Vaka,  Valaka,  Pimdarika,  Plava,  Sarari- mukha,  Nandimukha,  Madgu,  Utkrosha,  Kachdksha, Mallikaksha,  Shuklaksha,  Puslikarashdyika,  Kon^laka, Amviikukkiitika,  Megharava  and  Shvetacharana  etc. belong  to  the  Plava  family.  These  birds  are  found  to move  about  in  large  flocks.
IVIetrical  Text  : — The  flesh  of  any  one  of this  family  is  cooling,  demulcent,  and  spermatopoietic and  destroys  the  deranged  Vayu.  It  proves  beneficial in  cases  of  h9emopt5^sis,  is  sweet  in  taste  and  of  digestion, and  is  possessed  of  laxative  and  diuretic  properties. The  flesh  of  the  Hansa  is  heavy  (of  digestion),  heat- making,  sweet  and  demulcent.  It  tends  to  improve  the voice  and  complexion,  and  imparts  strength  to  the system.  It  is  spermatopoietic,  tissue-building  and  tonic, and  proves  curative  in  nervous  diseases  (V^ta-Vikara).
The  Conchifcrous  (Koshastha)  Spe- cies : — Animals  such  as,  the  Shankha,  Shankhanakha (a  species  of  small  bivalve  molluscs),  Shukti,  Shambuka and  Bhalluka,  etc.,  belong  to  the  Koshastha  (conchifcr- ous) group.
The  Pa'dina  Species  :- Animals  such  as, the  tortoise,  alligator,  crab,  black  crab,  porpoise,  etc., belong  to  this  species.
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
491
Metrical  Texts : — The  flesh  of  animals  of the  Shankha  and  Kiirma  orders  is  sweet  in  taste  and digestion,  cooling* in  its  potency,  demulcent,  and  bene- ficial to  stool  and  the  Pittam.  It  destroys  the  deranged Vayu  and  produces  Kapham.  Of  these,  the  spectes  of black  crab  is  strength-giving  and  heat-making  in  its potency,  and  tends  to  destroy  the  deranged  Vayu.  The white  species  is  laxative  and  diuretic  in  its  effect,  and tends  to  bring  about  an  adhesion  of  fractured  bones (or  produces  fermentation).  It  destroys  the  Vayu  and Pittam.
The     Piscatory     Order  : — The    piscatory
group  may  be  roughly  divided  into  two  broad  sub- divisions, such  as  the  Marine  and  the  River  (fresh  water) fish.  The  species  such  as  the  Rohita,  Pathina, Patala,  Rajiva,  Varmi,  Gomatsya,  Krishna-Matsya, Vagunjara,  Murala,  Sahasra-danstra,  etc.,  belong  to  the fresh  water  family.
Metrical  Texts  : — The  fresh  M^ater  (Xadeya) fish  (river  fish)  are  sweet  in  taste,  heavy  of digestion,  bring  on  haemoptysis  and  destroy  the deranged  Vayu.  They  are  heat-making  in  their potencies,  spermatopoietic  and  demulcent  and  tend  to reduce  the  quantity  of  stool.  Of  these,  the  Rohita leaves  an  astringent  after-taste,  and  destroys  the deranged  Vayu.  This  species  lives  on  such  aquatic plants     and    herbs    as      grow     in    fresh-water    pools
492  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XLV.
and  do  not  inordinately  generate  Pittam.  The Pathinas  produce  Kapham  and  are  spermatopoietic. They  are  carnivorous  and  somnolent'  in  their  habits, tend  to  vitiate  the  blood  and  the  Pittam,  and  originate dermal  affections.  The  species  of  fish  known  as the  Murala  is  constructive,  tonic,  spermatopoietic and  galactagoguic.  Fish  bred  in  tanks  or  ponds  are palatable  to  the  taste  and  demulcent  in  their  effect, while  those  reared  in  large  lakes  are  usually  found  to gain  in  strength  and  size,  while  the  species  reared  in shallow  water  is  weak  and  stunted.
The   Sarnudra    (Marine)  Species  :~
The  Timi,  Timingila  (a  species  of  large  whales)  Kulisha, Paka  matsya,  Niralaka,  Nandi-Varalaka,  Makara, Gargarka,  Chandraka,  Mahamina,  and  Rajiva  etc.,  con- stitute the  family  of  marine  fish.
Metrical  Texts  : — Sea  fish  are  heavy,  demul- cent, and  sweet,  and  do  not  inordinately  produce  Pittam. They  are  heat-making  (in  their  potency),  and  sper- matopoietic and  beneficial  to  the  stool,  and  destroy Vayu  and  generate  Kapham.
Sea  fish  are  extremely  strength-giving  in  their effect  owing  to  the  fact  of  their  living  on  animal food.  Fresh  water  fish  are  possessed  of  greater tissue-building  properties  than  their  marine  kindred, while   those   which   are    found   in    wells     and  Chuntis
Chap.  XLVI.  J  SUTRASTHANAM.
49:
are  said  to  be  possessed  of  gi-eater  carminative  (Vataghna) virtues  than  the  two  preceding  orders.  Fish  reared  in tanks  (Vapi)  are*  superior  to  the  two  preceding  species owing  to  their  greater  demulcent  and  palatable  pro- perties. River  fish  are  heavy  at  the  middle,  &wing to  the  fact  of  their  moving  about  with  the  help of  their  head  and  tail,  while  those  which  are cultured  in  tanks  and  ponds  (Sarah  and  Tadaga) are  speciall)'  light  about  their  heads.  Fish, which  are  found  in  hill  streams  or  fountains,  are extremely  heavy  about  the  parts  a  little  below  the region  of  their  head,  on  account  of  their  being  con- fined within  narrow  limits  and  the  consequent  absence of  an}^  lengthy  sweep.  Fish  reared  in  large  tanks (Sarasi)  are  lighter  in  the  foreparts  of  their  body  and heavy  in  their  lower  parts,  as  the}'  put  their  entire pressure  upon  their  breast  at  the  time  of  swimming. Thus  I  have  finished  describing  tl^e  specific  properties of  the  flesh  of  animals  that  frequent  swamps  or marshy  grounds  and  which  increase  the  secretions of  the  internal  organs  of  a  person  using  them  for  food.
Dried  or  putrid  flesh,  as  well  as  the  flesh  of  a diseased,  old,  emaciated,  poisoned,  or  snake-bitten animal,  or  of  one  of  extremely  tender  years  or  struck with  a  poisoned  dart  or  weapon,  or  of  that  which has  fed  on  unnatural  food,  should  be  carefull}^ avoided     inasmuch     as    dried    or      putrid     meat     is
494  I'HE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.XLVl.
shorn  of  all  its  potency.  The  flesh  of  a  diseased  or snake-bitten  animal  would  be  found  to  be  poisoned  or vitiated  in  its  properties ;  that  of  a  wounded  animal  is affected,  that  of  an  old  animal  is  enfeebled  in  its potency,  and  that  of  an  extremely  young  animal  is immature  in  its  virtue  and  hence  would  prove  positively injurious  to  the  system.
IVIctrical  Texts  :— Dry  meat  is  heavy,  brings on  catarrh  and  a  non-relish  for  food.  The  flesh  of  an animal  killed  by  poison  is  fatal.  The  flesh  of  an animal  of  tender  years  may  produce  vomiting.  The flesh  of  an  old  animal  produces  cough  and  dyspnoea, while  the  use  of  that  of  a  diseased  animal  may  be attended  with  a  simultaneous  derangement  of  the  three fundamental  humours  of  the  body.  Putrid  meat  pro- duces nausea,  while  the  use  of  that  of  an  enfeebled  or emaciated  animal  tei;ids  to  aggravate  the  Vayu.
Meat  falling  under  a  category  other  than  those described  above  should  be  deemed  as  good  and  whole- some. The  flesh  of  a  female  quadruped,  or  of  a  male bird,  or  of  a  small-bodied  creature  of  a  large-sized genus,  and  vice  versa,  is  principally  recommended to  be  used  amongst  quadrupeds,  birds,  and  animals. Similarly  the  flesh  of  a  small-sized  creature  amongst large-bodied  ones  of  the  same  species  should  be  pre- ferred as  food.
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  495
Now  we  shall  discourse  on  the  heav}'  or  light character  of  flesh  obtained  from  different  parts of  the  body  of  an«animal.  Of  the  different  fundamental principles  of  the  body  from  the  blood  to  the  semen, each  succeeding  one  is  heavier  than  the  one*  im- mediately preceding  it  in  the  order  of  ennumeration. Similarly,  (of  the  different  limbs  or  organs  of  a quartered  animal  such  as),  the  thighs,  the  shoulders,  the loins,  the  head,  the  legs_,  the  fore-extremities,  the  waist, the  back,  the  skin,  the  kidneys,  the  liver  and  the intestines,  each  succeeding  one  is  respectively  heavier than  the  one  immediately  preceding  it  in  the  order.
Metrical  Texts  : — The  head  is  heavier  than the  shoulders  ;  the  shoulders,  than  the  waist  ;  and  the waist,  than  the  back.  Similarty,  the  upper  parts  of the  Sakthi  (thighs)  are  heavier  than  their  lower  ends. Of  the  seven  fundamental  principles  of  the  organism (such  as  the  lymph  chyle,  blood,  flesh,  fat,  bone, marrow,  and  semen)  each  succeeding  one  is  heavier than  the  principle  immediately  preceding  it  in  the order  of  enumeration.  The  trunks  of  all  animals are  heavy.  The  lo\k^er  part  of  a  female  frame  and  the upper  one  of  a  male  are  respectively  heavier  [than their  upper  (fore)  and  lower  (hind)  parts.]
The  head  and  breast  of  a  bird  are  heavier  than its  other  limbs.  The  trunk  or  the  middle  part  of  a bird  is  so   equipoised  as  to  facilitate  the  movements
496  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLVI.
of  its  pinions  in  flight.  The  flesh  of  a  fruit-eating ^bird  produces  a  state  of  extreme  parchedness  in the  organism  (of  a  person  using  k  as  food,)  while that  of  a  carnivorous  one  acts  as  a  good  constructive tonic.  The  flesh  of  a  bird,  vrhich  Hves  on  "fish, produces  Pittam,  while  that  of  one,  which  lives  on paddy  (Dhan3^a),  subdues  the  V^yu.  Of  the  animals,  that live  in  dry  land  or  frequent  marshy  places,  as  well as  of  those  which  are  domesticated,  or  are  carnivorous in  their  habits,  or  are  possessed  of  unbifurcated  hoofs, or  live  by  darting  on  their  preys,  or  dwell  in  holes, or  are  possessed  of  long  legs,  or  eat  by  pricking,  or are  in  the  habit  of  first  scattering  their  food  with their  claws,  the  flesh  of  each  preceding  one  is  lighter and  tends  to  give  rise  to  a  lesser  secretion  from  the internal  organs  than  the  one  immediately  following it  in  the  order  of  enumeration.
Of  animals  belonging  to  the  same  genus,  the  flesh of  one,  which  attains  to  an  abnormally  large  size, should  be  rejected  as  inferior  in  pith  or  substance,  and heavy  as  regards  digestion.  The  flesh  about  the region  of  the  liver  of  all  animals  should  be  regarded as  the  very  best  in  respect  of  its  dietic  proper- ties, in  absence  whereof  the  flesh  of  a  young  animal not  at  all  used  up,  or  afllicted  with  any  disease and  just  quartered  that  day,  should  be  regarded  as coming  next  best.
Clmp.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  407
Authoritative  verse  on  the  sub- ject :  —The  age,  body,  development  of  limbs,  tem- perament, natures,  sex,  constitution,  size  and  habit of  an  animal  should  be  taken  into  consideration before  determining  whether  its  flesh  is  wholesome or  not.  The  measure  in  which  it  may  be  used as  food  with  decided  advantage  to  the  organism  and to  what  extent  it  will  purify  or  improve  its  virtues, should  also  be  considered.
The  Fruit  Group  (Phala-vargaj  :---Xow  we shall  discourse  (on  the  specific  virtues)  of  fruits, such  as  the  Dadima,  Amalaka,  Kapittha,  Vadara, Kola,  Karkandhu,  Sauvira,  Shimvitikaphala^  Matulunga, Amra,  Amrataka,  Karamarda,  Piyala,  Lakucha,  Bhavya, Paravata,  Vetraphala,  Prachinamalaka,  Tintidika,  Nipa, Koshamra,  Amlika,  Xaranga,  and  Jamvira,  etc.
Metrical  Texts  :— (We  ,may  describe  the general  properties  of  fruits  by  saying  that)  they  are acid  in  taste  and  heav)'  of  digestion,  heat-making  in their  potencies,  (expectorant)  of  (Kapham),  generate Pittam  and  subdue  the  Vayu.  Of  the  fruits  enumerated in  the  above  list  the  Dadima  leaves  an  astringent after-taste  and  does  not  generate  the  Pittam  to  an inordinate  degree.*     It  acts  as  an  appetiser,   brings   on
*  Charaka  and  Bhatlaraka  Harishchandra  exclude  Dadima  (pome- granate) from  the  list  of  Pittakara  agents,  while  JejjadScharya  is  of opinion  that  it  neither  generates  nor  subdues  the  Pittam.
63
498  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  XLVI.
flesh  and  a  relish  for  food,  is  palatable  to  the  taste,  and tends  to  constipate  the  bowels  by  (imparting  a  greater consistency  to  the  fecal  matter).  Dadimas  may  be  classi- fied into  two  distinct  species  according  as  they  are  sweet or  acid  to  the  taste.  The  sweet  species  subdues  the  three deranged  bodily  humours,  while  the  acid  one  subdues the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  The  fruit  known  as  the Amalaka  has  a  taste  blended  of  the  sweet,  pungent  and astringent  ones  with  a  shade  of  the  bitter.  It  is  laxative, spermatopoietic  and  beneficial  to  the  eye-sight,  and  is capable  of  subduing  all  the  three  deranged  humours The  Vataghna  virtue  of  this  fruit  should  be  ascribed to  its  acid  taste  ;  its  power  of  subduing  the  Pittam, to  its  sweetness  and  coolness  ;  and  its  efficacy  in subduing  the  Kapham,  to  its  affecting  the  tongue  as a  dr)'-  astringent  substance.  This  fruit  is  by  far  the  best known  fruit  as  possessing  high  therapeutic  properties. The  Karkandhu,  lil^e  the  Kola  or  the  Vadara,  generates the  Kapham  and  Pittam  in  its  unripe  or  immature stage,  while  in  its  ripe  or  matured  stage  it  is  sweet, demulcent,  purgative  and  subdues  the  Vayu  and Pittam.  The  fruit  known  as  the  Sauvira  is  possessed of  properties  similar  to  those  of  the  Vadara  ;  moreover  it is  sweet,  demulcent,  and  subdues  the  "\'ayu  and Pittam.  The  Shimvitika-fruit  is  cooling,  astringent and  palatable  and  has  an  astringent  taste.  The Kapittham  in  its  unripe  stage  produces  hoarseness. It  is   astringent   and  subdues  the  Kapham  and  increases
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^^g
the  Vayii,  while  in  its  ripe  stage  it  subdues  the Vayu  and  Kapham,  is  heav}',  and  has  a  sweet  and acid  taste.  Th5  fruit  known  as  the  Matulunga  is light,  acid,  appetising,  and  pleasant.  It  proves  beneficial in  cough  and  asthma,  brings  on  a  relish  for  food*,  allays thirst  and  cleanses  the  throat.  The  rind  of  a  Matulunga is  a  bitter  vermifuge  and  is  difficult  to  digest  ;  it  subdues the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  The  layer  of  skin  (lit.  flesh), immediately  underlying  the  rind  of  the  Matulunga, is  palatable,  cooling  in  its  potency,  demulcent  and heav}'  of  digestion,  and  also  subdues  the  Vayu  and Pittam.  The  membranous  or  cellular  covering,  which envelops  its  seeds,  is  light,  stomac'nic,  astringent  and palatable.  It  produces  Kapham  and  proves  curative  in cases  of  piles,  abdominal  glands  (Gulma)  and  vomiting. The  expressed  juice  of  the  Matulunga  is  recommended to  a  person  suffering  from  colic  pain  (gastralgia),  indiges- tion, constipation  of  the  bowels,  iippaired  digestion  as well  as  from  disorders  brought  about  through  the  derang- ed condition  of  the  Vayu  and  Kapham,  and  more  so in  cases  where  the  patient  has  lost  all  relish  for food.  An  unripe  Amra,  in  its  first  stage  of  develop- ment, tends  to  generate  the  Vayu  and  Pittam, while  one  with  closed  pollen  i  Vaddha-keshara  type) generates  the  Pittam.  Ripe  Amra  is  pleasant, cosmetic,  relishing  and  tonic,  helps  the  formation of  fresh  blood,  and  leaves  an  astringent  after-taste. It   is    sweet    and   heavy,  is   a  tissue-builder  and  tends
500  THE  SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA'.     [  Chap.  XLVI.
to  increase  the  formation  of  semen  and  also  subdues the  Vayu  and  Pittam.  The  Amrataka  f  Hog-apple)  is spermatopoietic,  is  surcharged  with  a  kind  of  oily  matter and  tends  to  increase  the  Kapham  in  the  system.  The Lakuclia  tends  to  destroy  the  semen,  is  long  retained in  the  stomach,  and  serves  to  derange  the  three  funda- mental humours  of  the  body.  The  Karamardakam is  relishing  and  acid  in  its  taste,  allays  thirst,  and generates  the  Kapham.  The  Piyalam  is  heavy,  cooling and  spermatopoietic.  The  Bhavyam  is  pleasant,  taste- ful, astringent,  and  acid  in  taste.  It  cleanses  the mouth  and  subdues  the  Pittam  and  Kapham.  It  is astringent,  heavy,  cooling  and  is  long  retained  in  the stomacii.
'I'he  fruit  known  as  the  Pardvatam  is  sweet and  relishing,  and  it  destroys  the  Vayu  and  a  ^-oracious appetite.  The  Nip?.,  like  the  old  Amalaka  fruits,  tends to  neutrahse  the  effects  of  poisons  originated  through the  chemical  combination  of  incompatible  substances in  the  organism.  Unripe  Tintidika  (tamarind)  subdues the  Vayu,  and  tends  to  generate  the  Pittam  and Kapham  in  the  organism,  while  in  its  ripe  state  it  is astringent,  h^at-making  and  stomachic.  It  destroys  the Vayu  and  Kapham  and  restores  a  relish  for  food. The  Koshamra  is  possessed  of  properties  nearlv identical  with  those  of  the  Tamarind.  The  properties of  a    ripe    .Amlika    fruit   are  the   same    as     those     of
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHyVNAM.  ^OI
the  latter  with  the  exception  that  it  further  acts as  a  purgative.  The  Narang'a  has  a  sweet  and  acid  taste, is  pleasant  and  refreshing,  and  gives  a  relish  to  food.  It is  heavy,  difficult  to  digest  and  subdues  the  Vayu.  The Jamvira  tends  to  allay  thirst  and  cures  colic  pain,  Vater- brash,  vomiting  and  asthma  ;  it  subdues  the  action  of  the deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham,  removes  constipation  of  the bowels,  and  helps  to  create  a  healthy  secretion of  the  Pittam.  The  Airavata  and  Dantashatha (different  varieties  of  Jamvira  are  acid  and  tend  to bring  on  an  attack  of  haemoptysis.
The  fruit  lof  such  trees  as  the  Ashvatha, the  Plaksha,  the  Audumvura,  etc.,  which  pass by  the  general  name)  of  Kshira-Vrikshas  as  well  as those  which  are  known  as  the  Jamva,  Rajadana, Todana,  Tinduka,  Vakula,  Phanvana,  Ashmantaka, Ashvakarna,  Phalgu,  Panishaka,  Gangeruka, Pushkara,  Varti,  Villa  and  Vimvi,  etc.  are  cooling, and  astringent  in  their  effect.  They  subdue  the Pittam  and  Kapham,  tend  to  produce  a  condition  of parchedness  in  the  system,  and  have  a  sweet  and astringent  taste.
Of  these  the  fruit  of  trees  which  belong  to  the genus  Kshiri-Vrikshas  is  heavy  and  cooling,  and is  long  retained  in  the  stomach  in  an  undigested state.  It  has  a  sweet,  acid  and  astringent  taste  and does    not    inordinatel}'  derange   the   Vayu.     The    fruit
502  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.  [Chap.  XLVI.
known  as  the  Jamvava  generates  the  Vayii.  It  is astringent,  and  subdues  the  Pittam  and  Kapham,  while the  Rajadana  is  demulcent,  sweet,  astringent  and  heav}'. The  Todana  is  acid,  astringent,  and  sweet  in  its  taste and  is  parchifying  and  subdues  the  Pittam  and  Vayu. It  is  (heat- making)  in  its  potency,  easily  digestible (light  of  digestion),  astringent,  demulcent  and  appetising and  further  generates  the  Pittam.  Unripe  Tinduka  fruit is  astringent,  and  heavy  in  digestion  and  produces  Vayu in  the  organism,  while  in  its  ripe  or  fully  matured stage  it  is  sweet,  and  subdues  the  Kapham  and Pittam.  The  Vakula  fruit  has  a  sweet  and  astrin- gent taste,  is  demulcent  and  astringent  in  its  proper- ties, imparts  a  greater  firmness  to  the  teeth,  and  removes the  viscid  condition  of  the  membranes.  The  fruit  of the  Dbanvana  has  an  astringent  taste,  and  is  cooling and  palatable  and  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Kapham. The  fruit  of  the  |xangeruka  and  Ashmantaka  is possessed  of  similar  properties  as  the  preceding  ones. The  Phalgu  fruit  is  long  retained  in  the  stomach  in an  undigested  state,  has  a  sweet  taste,  and  is  heavv of  digestion,  refreshing,  and  demulcent  in  its  effect. Raw  or  unripe  Parushaka  fruit  is  extremly  acid  in taste  with  a  shade  of  the  sweet,  leases  an  astringent after-taste,  is  light  of  digestion,  generates  the Pittam,  and  subdues  the  Kapham  ;  while  in  its ripe  state  it  is  sweet  in  taste,  subdues  the  Vayu and    Pittam,   is  sweet    in   digestion  and  coohng  in  its
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^O^
potency  and  proves  curative  in  cases  of  haemoptysis. The  Pushkara  fruit  is  sweet,  and  is  long  retained  in the  stomach  in  ^n  undigested  state.  It  produces  the Kapham  and  is  tonic,  and  heavy  of  digestion  (hard to  digest).  Raw  and  tender  Vilva  fruit  subdues  the Vayu  and  Kapham.  It  is  keen,  demulcent  astringent, and  appetising,  has  a  pungent,  bitter  and  astringent taste,  and  is  heat-making  in  its  potency,  while  in  its ripe  state  it  leaves  a  sweet  after- taste.  Further  it is  heavy  of  digestion,  can  be  but  incompletely digested,  and  is  long  retained  in  the  stomach,  causing it  thus  to  distend  and  producing  the  emission  of  a fetid- smelling  flatus.  The  Vimvi  fruit,  as  well  as that  known  as  the  Ashva  karna,  is  galactagoguic. They  destroy  the  Pittam  and  Kapham  and  prove beneficial  in  cases  of  thirst,  burning  sensation  of  the  skin, fever,  hgemoptysis,  cough,  asthma  and  consumption.
The  fruits  such  as,  the  Tala,  Narikela,  Panasa and  Maucba,  etc.  are  sweet  in  taste  and  of  di- gestion, and  subdue  the  Vayu  and  Pittam.  They are  cooling  in  their  potencies,  and  act  as  constructive tonics.  Of  these  the  fruit  of  a  Tala  is  sweet  in taste  and  heavy  of  digestion.  It  subdues  the  deranged Pittam.  The  pulp  found  inside  its  seeds  is  sweet of  digestion  and  diuretic,  and  it  subdues  the  Vayu  and Pittam.  The  Narikela  fruit  is  heavy  of  digestion, demulcent,  anti-choleric,  sweet,  cooling  in  its  potency.
I
504  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.         [  Chap.  XLVI.
tonic,  tissue-building,  pleasant,  laxative  and  diuretic.  It subdues  the  Pittam,  The  Panasam  is  sweet  and astringent  in  taste,  demulcent  and  heiivy  of  digestion. The  Maucham  has  a  sweet  and  astringent  taste,  not cooling  in  its  potency,  proves  curative  in  cases  of hccmoptysis,  acts  as  a  spemiatopoietic  and  improves  the relish  for  food.  It  generates  the  Kapham  and  is  heavy of  digestion.
The  fruits  such  as  the  Drakshas,  Kashmaryas, Madhukas,  Kharjuras,  etc.,  have  a  sweet  taste,  are heavy  of  digestion  and  prove  curative  in  cases  of haemoptysis.  Of  these  grapes  are  laxative,  beneficial to  the  voice,  sweet,  demulcent,  and  cooling  in their  potency.  They  prove  beneficial  in  cases  of haemoptysis,  fever,  asthma,  thirst,  burning  sensation of  the  skin,  and  consumption.  The  fruit  known as  the  Kashmarya  Phala  is  pleasant  and  diuretic. It  purifies  the  blood,  improves  the  intellect  and  growth of  hair,  and  is  rejuvenescent  and  subdues  the  Vayu and  Pittam.  Kharjuras  are  possessed  of  the  virtue  of ari'esting  all  bodily  wastes.  They  prove  beneficial  in Urakshata,  are  pleasant,  cooling  in  their  potenc)',  refresh- ing, heavy  of  digestion,  sweet  in  taste,  and  prove curative  in  cases  of  haemoptysis.  The  flowers  of Madhuka  trees  are  tissue-building,  unpleasant  and heavy  of  digestion,  while  their  fruit  subdues  the Vayu  and  Pittam.
Chap.  XLVI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.
505
Fruits  such  as  the  Vatama,  Akshoda,  Abhishuka, Nichula,  Pichu,  Nikochaka,  and  Urumana,  etc.  are demulcent,  heat-ifiaking  in  their  potency,  heavy  of digestion,  constructive,  tonic,  and  sweet  in  taste.  They subdue  the  Vayu,  Pitta m  and  Kapham.  *
The  fruit  known  as  the  Lavali  is  astringent  and shghtly  bitter  in  taste,  improves  a  rehsh  for  food,  and is  pleasant,  aromatic  and  refreshing  to  the  whole system.  It  subdues  the  Kapham  and  Pittam.  The fruits  such  as  the  Vasiram,  and  the  Shitapakyam,  as well  as  the  stems  of  Bhallataka  trees,  are  hard  to digest  and  are  long  retained  in  the  stomach  in  an undigested  condition.  They  tend  to  produce  a  state  of dryness  in  the  organism,  derange  the  Vayu,  are  cooling in  their  potency,  sweet  of  digestion,  and  prove  curative in  cases  of  heemoptysis.
The  fruits  known  as  the  Aii'avata  and  the Dantashatba  have  an  extremely  acid  taste  and  tend  to bring  on  an  attack  of  haemoptysis.  The  fruit  known as  the  Tanka  is  coohng  in  its  potency,  has  a  sweet  and astringent  taste,  is  heavy  and  generates  the  Vayu. The  fruit  known  as  the  Aingudam  is  demulcent,  and heat-making  in  its  potency,  has  a  sweet  and  bitter taste,  and  subdues  the  V.4yu  and  Kapham.  The Shami  fruit  is  heavy,  sweet  and  heat-making,  produces a  state  of  parchedness  in  the  organism,  and  helps the   falling   off  of  hair.     The   Shleshmataka    fruit    is
64
5o6  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XLVI.
heavy   of    digestion,   generates  the   Kapham,   and    is sweet  in  taste  and  cooling  in  its  potency.
Fruits  such  the  Karira,  Akshaka  Pilu  and Trinashunya  have  a  sweet,  bittei  and  pungent taste,  and  are  heat-making  in  their  potency.  They subdue  the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  Of  these  the  Pilu has  a  bitter  and  astringent  taste.  It  generates  the Pittam,  acts  as  purgative,  is  pungent  in  digestion,  keen, heat-making  and  oily.  It  subdues  the  "\'ayu  and  p Kapham.  The  Arushkara  and  Tauvaraka  fruits  have an  astringent  taste,  are  pungent  in  digestion, heat-making  in  their  potency  and  prove  curative  in cases  of  worms  in  the  intestines,  fever,  constipation of  the  bowels  (Anaha)  and  Meha.  Fruits  such  as, the  Karanja,  Kinshuka,  and  Arishtaphalam  (Nimva) are  vermifugenous  and  pungent  in  digestion,  and prove  curative  in ,  cases  of  Leprosy,  Gulma  (internal tumour).  Ascites,  Piles  and  Prameha.  The  Vidanga  ^ fruit  produces  a  state  of  dr3ness  in  the  body,  is heat-making  in  its  potency,  light,  and  pungent  in digestion,  subdues  the  Yayu  and  Kapham  and  is  slightly bitter  and  anti-toxic.  The  Abhaya  (Chebulic  Myrobaians) proves  curative  in  cases  of  ulcers,  is  heat-making  (in its  potenc)'),  and  acts  as  a  purgative,  tends  to  reduce corpulency  and  subdues  the  deranged  humours.  It  is appetising  and  invigorating  to  the  eye-sight,  has  an  acid and  astringent  taste,  and  proves  curative  in  oedema  and
Chap.  XLVi.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  507
cutaneous  affections.  The  Aksham  fruit  is  possessed of  purgative  properties,  is  light  (of  digestion),  and  pro- duces a  state  of  •dryness  in  the  organism.  It  is  heat- making  in  its  potency,  produces  hoarseness  Aphonia), is  a  vermifuge  and  is  beneficial  to  the  sight,  h^is  an astringent  taste,  is  sweet  in  digestion  and  subdues the  Pittam  and  Kapham.  The  Puga  fruit  subdues  the Pittam  and  Kapham,  produces  a  state  of  dryness  in  the organism,  cleanses  the  mouth  of  all  secretions  and impurities,  has  a  slightly  sweet  and  astringent  taste, and  is  possessed  of  laxative  properties.  The  fruits and  vegetables  such  as  the  Jatikosha,  the  Jati Phalam,  the  Kataka  Phalam  the  Kakkolakam, Lavauga  and  the  Karpura  etc.,  have  a  bitter  pun- gent taste,  subdue  thirst  and  Kapham,  are  light in  digestion,  and  remove  bad  odours  from  the  mouth and  cleanse  it  of  all  impurities.  The  Karpura  has  a shghtly  bitter  taste,  is  aromatic,  cooling  in  its  potency, and  light  in  digestion.  It  is  possessed  of  liquefacient properties  and  is  specially  recommended  in  dryness  of the  mouth  and  fetid  breath.  The  Lata-Kasturika  is similar  in  its  virtue  to  the  Karpura  and  is  cooling  and both  laxative  and  diuretic.  The  pith  of  the  Piyala  fruit has  a  sweet  taste,  is  spermatopoietic  and  subdues  the Vayu  and  Pittam.  The  pith  (the  kernel  found  inside the  seeds)  of  the  Vaibhitaki  fruit  is  intoxicating  and subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Pittam.  The  pith or  the  kernel  of  the  Kola   fruit  has  an  astringent  sweet
5o8
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XLVl.
taste,  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Pittam  allays  thirst  and alleviates  nausea  and  vomiting.  The  kernel  of  the seed  of  the  Amalaka  resembles  the  last  named  pith in  its  properties.  The  kernels  of  such  fruits  as  the Vijapuraka,  Shampaka  and  Koshamra  are  sweet  in digestion,  appetising,  demulcent,  and  subdue  the  Vayu and  Pittam.  These  kernels  of  seeds  should  be  regarded  as possessing  identical  properties  as  the  pulps  of  the  fruits from  which  they  had  been  extracted.  All  fruits  with the  exception  of  Vilva  are  efficacious  in  their  ripe  and matured  condition.  The  latter  (Vilvas)  have  been enjoined  to  be  eaten  unripe  for  medicinal  purposes  as well  as  with  a  view  to  derive  a  greater  efficacy from  iheir  use.  Unripe  Vilvas  are  astringent  and  appe- tising in  their  eftect,  heat-making  in  their  potency, and  have  an  astringent-pungent-bitter  taste.
Fruit,  which  is  bliglited  or  that  affected  by  any other  disease  or  that  which  has  grown  in  an  improper season,  or  raw  or  over-ripe,  or  worm-eaten,  should  be lejected  as  unfit  for  use.  Here  the  description  of the  fruit- group  is  ended.
The  group  of  Potherbs  :— Now  we  shall deal  with  the  properties  of  potherbs.  The  fruits  of  such creepers  as  tlie  Fushpaphala,  Alavu  and  Kalindak  des- tro}^  the  Pittam,  generate  the  Vayu,  and  slightly  produce the  Kapha m.  They  tend  to  increase  the  discharge  of the  stool  and  urine,  and  are  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion.
Chap.  XLVI.  1  SUTRASTHANAM.  509
Of  these  the  tender  Kushmandas  are  h'ght  in  digestion, heat-making  in  their  potency,  and  contain  a  greater  pro- portion of  alkalifle  matter.  They  are  appetising,  diuretic and  pleasant  in  their  effect,  and  tend  to  subdue  the action  of  all  kinds  of  deranged  humours,  and  prove  Vhole- some  in  cases  of  mental  aberration,  such  as,  insanity,  etc. The  Kalindak  tends  to  reduce  the  quantit}^  of  semen  and impairs  the  eye- sight.  It  generates  both  the  Vayu  and Kapham,  while  an  Alavu  is  a  purgative,  produces  a  con- dition of  parchedness  in  the  system,  is  heavy  in  digestion and  extremely  cooling  in  its  potency.  The  species, known  as  the  bitter  Alavu,  is  unpalatable  and  has  an emetic  property,  and  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Pittam.
The  fruits  such  as  the  Trapusha,  Ervaruka,  Karkaru, and  Shirna-Vrinta  are  heavy  in  digestion  and  long retained  in  the  stomach  in  an  undigested  state.  They  are palatable,  cooling  in  their  potency,  generate  Kapham, tend  to  facilitate  the  discharge  of  stool  and  urine, contain  a  little  alkaline  matter,  and  are  sweet  in  taste. A  green  and  tender  cucumber  subdues  the  Pittam, while  one  which  is  of  a  pale  yellow  colour  acts  as a  stomachic.  A  ripe  and  yellow  Trapusham  tends to  subdue  the  Pittam  only  in  the  event  of  its  possess- ing an  acid  taste.  Similarly,  ripe  Ervarukas  and Karkarus  generate  the  Vayu  and  Kapham,  have  a sweet  taste,  and  are  found  to  be  charged  with  alkaline matter.  The}^  are  appetising,  relishing  and  do  not  inordj-
^lo  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.       [Chap.  XLVI.
nately  generate  the  Pittam.  A  Shirna-Vrinta  (water melon)  contains  a  little  alkaline  matter,  is  sweet,  and purgative.  It  generates  the  Kaphamg  is  pleasing  and appetising  in  its  property,  and  proves  curative  in  cases of  Anr\ha  and  Ashthild.
The  spices  and  herbs  include  the  Pippali,  Maricha, Shringavera,  Ardraka,  Hingu,  Jiraka,  Kustumvuru, Jamviraka,  Sumukha,  Surasa,  Arjaka,  Bhustrina, Sugandhaka,  Kasamaraddka,  Kalamala,  Kutheraka, Kshavaka,  Ksharapushpa,  Shigru,  Madhu-Shigru, Phanijhyaka,  Sarshapa,  Rajika,  Kulahala,  Benu, Gandira,  Tilaparnika,  Varshabhu,  Chitraka,  Mulaka- Potika,  Lashuna,  Palandu  and  Kalaya,  etc.
IVIctrlcal  Texts  :— Potherbs  have  a  pungent taste,  are  relishing,  and  heat-making  in  their  potency, and  subdue  the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  They  are variously  used  for  seasoning  food.  Of  the  above- said spices  and  herbs,  the  unripe  or  immature  Pippali  is heavy  in  digestion,  sweet  in  taste,  cooling  in  potency and  generates  Kapham.
Dried  Pippali  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Kapham, acts  as  a  spermatopoietic  and  slightly  soothes  the Pittam.  Green  or  immatured  Maricha  is  sweet  of  diges- tion, heavy  and  phlegmagoguic  in  its  effect.  Dr}' Maricha  has  a  pungent  taste,  is  light  of  digestion  and heat-making  in  its  potency.  It  is  anti-spermatopoietic, destroys  the  Vayu   and   Kapham,  and  slightly   subdues
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTKASTHANAM.  51  ]
the  Pittam.  The  white  Maricha  is  neither  too  cooling nor  too  heat-making  in  its  potency,  is  more  efficacious than  the  two  "preceding  varieties  and  is  specially invigorating  to  the  eye-sight.  The  Nagaram  destroys the  Vayu,  has  a  pungent  taste,  and  is  s\\*eet  of digestion.  It  is  heat-making  in  its  potency,  acts  as  a spermatopoietic  and  aphrodisiac,  is  pleasant  and  imparts a  relish  to  food.  It  is  appetising,  light  of  digestion, and  charged  with  an  oily  substance.  The  Ardrakam has  a  pungent  taste,  is  heat-making  in  its  potency, acts  as  a  pleasant  spermatopoietic,  subdues  the  Vayu and  Kapham,  proves  beneficial  to  the  voice,  and  relieves colic  pain  and  suppression  of  the  stool  and  distension of  the  stomach.  The  Hingu  is  light  of  digestion, heat-making  in  its  potency,  acts  as  a  digestant,  and is  appetising.  It  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Kapham,  has  a pungent  taste,  is  demulcent,  laxative  and  sharp,  and relieves  colic  pain,  indigestion  *and  suppression  of stool.  The  Jiraka  (whether  white  or  yellow)  is  sharp and  heat-making  in  its  potency,  pungent  in  digestion and  imparts  a  relish  to  food.  It  has  a  pungent  taste, is  appetising  and  aromatic,  increases  the  Pittafn,  and destro3"S  the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  The  species,  known as  Karavi  and  Karavi,  like  the  Upakunchika,  are possessed  of  properties  similar  to  those  of  the  aforesaid Jiraka,  and  are  variously  used  m  seasoning  dishes and  condiments.  Raw  or  undried  Kustumvari  (cori- ander seeds)  is  sweet,  aromatic  and  pleasant,  while  in  its
iI2
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLVI.
dried  state  it  is  sweet  in  digestion,  acts  as  a  demulcent, allays  thirst,  and  alleviates  the  burning  sensation  of  the skin.  It  has  a  slightly  bitter  and  pungent  taste,  tends to  subdue  the  deranged  humours  of  the  body  and purifies,  its  internal  channels.  Jamvira  is  digestant, sharp  and  acts  as  a  vermifuge.  It  subdues  the  Vayu  and Kapham,  and  is  aromatic,  appetising  and  pleasant.  It tends  to  remove  the  bad  taste  in  the  mouth,  and alleviates  cough,  dyspnoea  and  diseases  due  to  the  action of  the  deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham  or  due  to  poison. The  Surasa  generates  the  Pittam,  reHeves  the  colic  and pain  at  the  sides,  while  the  Sumukha  is  said  to  be possessed  of  the  same  properties  with  the  exception  that it  neutralises  the  effects  of  poisons  brought  about through  the  chemical  combination  (of  several  incompati- ble substances  in  the  organism).  The  herbs  known  as the  Surasa,  Arjaka  and  Bhustrina  destroy  the  Kapham, are  light  of  digestion,  and  tend  to  produce  a  state  of parchedness  in  the  organism.  They  are  demulcent, generate  the  Pittam,  and  are  heat-making  in  their  potency and  pungent  in  taste  and  digestion.  The  herb  called the  Kasamardaka  has  a  bitter  and  sweet  taste.  It subdues  the  Yayu  and  Kapham,  is  a  digestant,  cleanses the  throat  and  specially  subdues  the  Pittam.  The Shigru  has  a  pungent,  alkaline,  sweet  and  bitter  taste and  generates  the  Pittam,  while  the  Madhii- Shigru variety  is  laxative,  has  a  bitter  and  pungent  taste;  is appetising   and   removes   oedematous    swelling   of    the
Chap.  XLVi.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  513
body.  The  Sarshapa  herbs,  as  well  as  those  known  as Gandira  and  Vega,  can  be  but  imperfectly  digested. They  tend  to  suppress  the  discharge  of  stool  and urine,  produce  a  state  of  dryness  in  the  organism,  are sharp  and  heat-making  in  their  potency,  and  serv^e  to derange  the  three  fundamental  humours  of  the  body.  The herbs  called  Chitraka  and  Tilaparni  are  light  (of  diges- tion), and  subdue  the  Kapham  and  oedema.  The herb  known  as  the  Varshabhu  subdues  the  Vayu  and Kapham.  It  proves  beneficial  in  cases  of  oedema, abdominal  dropsy  and  piles.  The  Mulaka-Potika  has a  pungent  bitter  taste.  It  is  pleasant,  appetising,  light and  throat- cleansing,  tends  to  impart  a  greater  relish to  food,  and  subdues  the  action  of  all  kinds  of  deranged humours.  Raw  or  immature  Mulaka  of  the  larger species  is  heavy  in  digestion  and  long  retained  in  the stomach  in  an  undigested  state.  It  is  irritating  and lends  to  produce  a  derangement  of  tlie  three  humours of  the  body,  while  boiled  with  oil  or  butter  it  acts  as  a denmlcent  and  subdues  the  ^'ayu,  Pittam  and  Kapham.
Dried  Mulaka  subdues  the  action  of  the  three deranged  humours.  It  is  anti-toxic  and  light (of  digestion).  All  dried  herbs  with  the  exception  of  the preceding  one  generate  the  Vayu  and  take  a  long time  to  be  digested.
The   properties   described   in   connection   with   the Mulaka   bulb   in   its  different   stages   of    growth    and 65
su
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XLVI.
conditions     can     also     be     attributed     to   its   flowers, leaves  and  fruits  respectivel3\     Mulaka  flowers  subdue the  Pittam    and  Kapham,    while    their    fruit     subdues the     Vayu     and     Kapham.      Rasona     is    demulcent,     i heat-making,      sharp,     pungent,      slimy,     heavy     and     ] laxative.       It   has    a   palatable     taste     and     is    tonic, spermatopoietic,  and  tends  to  improve  the  voice,  intellect     *. and   complexion    and  to   bring   about   an    adhesion    of fractured  bones.    It  alle^iates  heart-disease,  indigestion, fever,    Vivandha,    Kukshi-Shula,    Gulma,    a    non-relish for   food,   cough,  asthma,    piles,     Kushtha,    dulness  of appetite,  swelling  (Shopha),  worms  and  diseases  due  to  the     ^ Vayu  and  Kapham.     Palandu  is   not  excessively   heat- making    in    its    potency,     has     a     pungent     taste,    is heavy,    tonic   and    appetising.     It     slightly     generates the  Pittam  and  Kapham.      It  subdues  the  Vayu.  |
The  species,  known  as  the  Kshira-Paldndu,  is demulcent,  cooling  in  its  potency,  and  relishing,  imparts a  steadiness  to  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  body, is  tonic,  promotes  the  growth  of  flesh,  improves  the intellect  and  increases  the  Kapham.  It  is  palatable, heav)'',  slimy  and  proves  beneficial  in  cases  of haemoptysis.  The  potherbs  called  Kalaya  subdue the  Pittam  and  Kapham,  generate  Vayu,  are  heavy and  sweet  in  digestion,  and  leave  an  astringent  after- taste in  the  mouth.
The   leaves   of  plants     and     trees    known   as    the    .t
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^,^
Chuchchu,  Juthika,  Taruiii,  Jivanti,  Vimvitika,  Xandi, Bhallataka,  Chagalantri,  Vriksliadani,  Phanji,  Shalmali, Shelu,  Vanashpcfti-prasava,  Shana,  Karvudara  and Kovidara  etc.,  have  an  astringent,  sweet  and  bitter taste,  and  prove  curative  in  haemoptysis.  They  slibdue the  Kapham,  generate  the  Vayu  and  are  astringent  in their  action  and  light  of  digestion  (easily  digestible). Of  these,  the  Chuchchu  is  light  of  digestion,  and acts  as  a  vermifuge.  It  is  slimy,  proves  beneficial to  ulcers,  is  sweet  and  astringent  in  taste  and action.  Jt  tends  to  subdue  the  action  of  the  three deranged  humours  (Tridosha).  The  Jivanti  herb  is beneficial  to  the  eyes  and  subdues  all  kinds  of deranged  humours.  The  leaves  of  the  Vrikshadani plant  subdue  the  Vayu.  Phanji  leaves  are  slightly tonic.  The  leaves  of  trees  or  plants  belonging  to the  Kshira-Vriksha  or  to  the  Utpala  group  are  cool- ing in  their  potency,  astringent  \i}  their  taste  and action,  and  prove  beneficial  in  dj^sentery,  (intestinal haemorrhage)  and  haemoptysis.
The  leaves  of  the  Punarnava,  Varuna,  Tarkari, Uruvuka  (white  castor),  Vatsadani,  and  Vilva  etc.,  are heat-making  in  their,  potency,  and  have  a  sweet  and bitter  taste  and  pacify  the  deranged  Vayu.  Of  these,  the Punarnava  are  specially  possessed  of  the  virtue  of removing  oedema  (ShophaV
The   potherbs,  such   as  the   Tanduliyaka,  Upodika,
-l6  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap,  xr.vi.
Ashvavala,  Chilli,  Palankya,  and  Vastuka  etc.,  are laxative  and  diuretic,  and  have  a  sweet  and  alkaline taste.  They  slightly  generate  the  Vayu  and  Kaphani. and  cure  hsemoptysis.
Metrical  Text  : — Of  these,  the  species  known as  the  Tanduliya  is  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion,  and proves  curative  in  cases  of  haemoptysis  and  somnolence (due  to  the  effects  of  poison,  wine  or  vitiated  blood). It  is  antitoxic  and  extremely  cooling  in  its  potency, and  produces  a  state  of  parchedness  in  the  system. The  Upodika  species  is  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion. It  is  spermatopoietic,  anti-narcotic,  cooling,  laxative, demulcent  and  tonic.  It  generates  the  Kapham,  and subdues  the  Vayu  and  Pittam  in  the  system.  The species  called  the  Vastuka  is  a  pungent  (in  digestion), vermifuge,  and  is  tonic.  It  improves  the  intellect  and digestion  and  is  alkaline,  laxative  and  relishing,  and  tends to  subdue  all  kinds  of  deranged  humours  of  the  bod>'. The  species  Chilli  resembles  the  Vastuka  in  its  proper- ties, while  those  of  the  Palankya  is  identical  with those,  of  the  Tanduliya.  It  generates  the  V^vu, produces  a  state  of  parchedness  in  the  system,  and tends  to  suppress  the  discharge  of  stool  and  urine. It  proves  remedial  to  the  deranged  Kapham  and Pittam.  The  potherbs  Ashvavala  produces  a  condition of  dryness  in  the  organism  and  tends  to  suppress  the discharge  of  stool  and  urine  and  Vayu  (emission  of  flatus).
Chap.  XLVI.  •  SUTRASTHANAM.
517
The  potherbs  (leaves  of  edible  plants)  such  as  the Mandukaparni,  Saptala,  Siinishannaka,  Suvarchala, Brahma- siivarch?lla,  Pippali,  Gudiichi,  Gojihva,  Kaka- machi;  Prapunnada,  Avalguja,  Satina,  Vrihati-phala, Kantak^rika-phala,  Patola,  Vartaku,  Kararellaka, Katukika,  Kevuka,  Uruvuka,  Parpataka,  Kiratatikta, Karkotaka,  Arishta,  Koshataki,  A'etra,  Karira,  Ataru- shaka,  Arkapushpi,  etc.,  are  light  and  palatable,  and prove  curative  in  haemoptysis,  Kushtha,  Meha,  fever, dyspnoea,  cough  and  create  a  relish  for  food.
Metrical  Texts  :  — The  Mandukaparni  and the  Gojihvika  species  are  alike  in  their  properties, the  former  being  astringent  and  beneficial  to  the Pittam,  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion,  cooling  in its  potency  and  of  easy  digestion.  The  Sunishannaka species  is  easily  digested  and  is  unattended  witli anv  acid  reaction.  It*  is  astringent  in  its  action  and tends  to  subdue  the  three  deranged  bodily  humours, and  it  also  arrests  the  evacuations  of  the  bowels. The  Abulguja  has  a  bitter  taste,  is  pungent  in  diges- tion and  subdues  the  deranged  Pittam  and  K^pham. The  potherb  Satina  is  slightly  bitter  and  astrin- gent in  taste  and  tends  to  subdue  the  three  deranged humours  of  the  body.  The  Kakamachi  herb is  neither  too  coohng  nor  too  heat-making  in  its potency  and  removes  cutaneous  affections.  It subdues    the  deranged     humours     as    the    preceding
5i8  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [Chap.  XLVI,
species.  The  fruit  of  (the  two  species  of;  Vrihati plants  has  an  astringent  and  bitter  taste,  and  is b'ght  of  digestion.  It  is  vermicidtil  and  proves curative  in  cases  of  itch  and  cutaneous  diseases (Kushtha),  and  subdues  the  deranged  Vayu  and Kapham.  The  leaves  and  fruit  of  the  Patola  creeper have  a  bitter  taste.  They  are  beneficial  to  ulcers, pungent  in  digestion,  heat-making,  spermatopoietic, relishing  and  appetising.  The}-  subdue  the  deranged Pittam  and  Kapham  without  producing  the  Vayu.  The V^rtakam  subdues  the  Vayu  and  Kapham.  It  has  a bitter  and  pungent  taste,  is  light,  relishing  and appetising.  Matured  Vartakam  is  alkaline  (in  its taste)  and  generates  the  Pittam.  The  Karkotakam and  the  Karavellakam  are  possessed  of  properties similar  to  those  of  the  preceding  species  >  Vartakam  . The  herbs  and  creepers  such  as  the  Atarushaka, Kiratatikta,  Parpataka  and  Guduchi  together  with  the tender  shoots  of  the  Vetra  and  the  Nimva,  have a  bitter  taste  and  subdue  the  Pittam  and  Kapham. The  leaves  of  the  Varuna  and  Prapunnada  destroy  the deranged  Kapham  and  give  rise  to  a  condition  of dryness  in  the  system.  They  are  light  of  digestion, cooling  in  their  potency,  and  tend  to  enrage  or  agitate the  bodily  Vayu  and  Pittam.  The  potherbs  known  as Kalashakam  are  appetising  and  pungent  in  taste  and  tend to  neutralise  the  effects  of  poison  originated  through  the chemical   action    of    two    incompatible   substances    in
Chap.  XLVI.]  StJTRASTHANAM.  519
the  organism.  The  species  called  Kaushumbha  has a  sweet  taste,  and  produces  a  condition  of  dryness in  the  organism.  It  is  heat-making  in  its  potency and  light  of  digestion,  and  subdues  the  deranged Kapham.  The  species  called  Xalika-shakam  has^  sweet taste.  It  generates  the  Vayu  and  subdues  the  Pittam. The  species  called  the  Changeri  has  an  acid,  astrin- gent and  sweet  taste.  It  is  appetising  and  heat- making  in  its  potency,  proves  beneficial  in  cases  of deranged  Vayu  and  Kapham  and  curative  in  cases  of mesenteric  disorders  (Grahani)  and  piles.
The  leaves  of  the  Lonika,  Jatuka,  Triparnika, Pattura,  Jivaka,  Suvarchala,  Kurmaka,  Kathinjara, Kuntalika,  Kurantika  etc.,  are  sweet  in  taste  and digestion  and  cooling  in  their  potency.  They  subdue the  Kapham  and  do  not  inordinately  generate  the Pittam.  They  leave  a  saline  after-taste  in  the  mouth and  produce  a  condition  of  dryness  in  the  organism. They  are  alkaline  and  laxative,  and  generate  the  Vayu. The  potherbs  known  as  Kuntalika  have  a  sweet  and bitter  taste.  The  species  Kurantika  has  an  as|;ringent taste.  The  species  called  the  Rajakshavak-Shakam,  as well  as  the  one  called  Sathi-Shakam,  is  astringent  in its  property,  cooling  in  its  potency,  easily  digestible  and is  not  hostile  to  (does  not  enrage  or  aggravate), (subdues  D.R.)  the  humours.  The  species  known as   the    Harimanthajam    is   sweet   in    taste   and   diges-
5-20
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XLVi.
tion  but  is  difficult  to  digest.  The  species  known as  Knlayani  (leaves  of  the  Matara  pulse;  is  purgative and  sweet  in  taste.  It  produces  a  state  of  dryness  in the  organism  and  extremely  generates  the'  Vayu.  It tends  t(i  dislodge  the  deranged  humours  from  their  loca- tions in  the  upper  part  of  the  body  Sramsanam). The  Putikaranjas  are  heat- making  in  their  potency  and alleviate  oedema  and  anasarca.  They  are  pungent  in digestion,  easily  digestible  and  subdue  the  Vayu  and the  Kapham.  The  leaves  of  the  Tamvula  are  sharp, heat-making  (in  their  potency;  and  bitter,  astringent and  pungent  in  taste.  They  tend  to  aggravate  the Pittam,  are  aromatic,  prove  beneficial  to  the  voice,  and remove  viscidness  in  the  organism.  They  pacify  the Kapham  and  Vayu  in  the  system,  are  appetising,  pun- gent in  digestion  and  deodorant,  and  tend  to  remoAe the  fetid  smell  in  the  mouth,  cleanse  it  of  all  impurities and  alleviate  all  itchinf^  sensations  experienced  inside  its cavity.     This  ends  the  description  of  potherbs.
The  Flower  Croup  :— The  flowers  of  such trees  as.the  Kovidara,  Shana,  and  Shalmali  are  sweet  in taste  and  digestion  and  prove  curative  in  cases  oi haemoptysis  The  flowers  of  the  Vrisha  and  Agastya have  a  bitter  taste,  are  pungent  in  digestion  and alleviate  a  wasting  cough  (Phthisis).  The  flowers  of the  Madhu-shigru  and  Karira  are  pungent  in  digestion. They  destroy  the  Vayu  and  increase   the   discharge   of
Chap.  XLVI.  J  SUTK ASTH A N  A  M .
5^1
stool  and  urine.  The  Agastya  flower  is  neither  too coohng  nor  inordinately  heat-making  in  its  potency and  proves  specftilly  beneficial  in  cases  of  night- blindness  (Nyctalopia).  The  flowers  of  the  Rakta- Vriksha,  Ximva,  ]\Iushkaka,  Arka,  Asana  and  Kutaja trees  subdue  the  Pittam  and  Kapham,  and  prove curative  in  skin  diseases  ( Kushtham).
The  Padnia  has  a  bitter  and  sweet  taste,  is cooling  in  its  potency,  and  subdues  the  deranged Pittam  and  Kapham.  The  Kumuda  has  a  sweet taste,  and  is  shmy,  demulcent,  pleasing  and  cool- ing in  its  potency.  The  two  varieties  of  the  same species  known  as  the  Kuvalayam  and  the  Utpalam, slightly  differ  from  the  preceding  varieties  in  their properties.  The  Sindhuvaram  is  renowned  for  its virtue  of  destroying  the  Pittam.  The  Mallika  and Malati  flowers  have  a  bitter  taste  and  subdue  the Pittam  owing  to  their  sweet  scent.  The  Vakulas,  like the  Patala  flowers,  are  sweet  smelling  and  pleasant,  their pleasing  and  odoriferous  property  instantaneously  per- meates the  whole  system.  The  Xagam  (flower),  lik.e  the Kumkumum,  is  antitoxic  and  subdues  the  Pittam  and Kapham.  The  Champakam  is  curative  in  cases  of haemoptysis.  It  is  both  cooling  and  heat-making  in  its potency  and  subdues  the  deranged  Kapham.  The Kinshukam,     like     the     Kurantakam,     subdues      the
Kapham  and  Pittam. 66
522  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.       [Chap.XLVI.
A  flower  should  be  understood  as  possessed  of the  same  properties  which  are  natural  to  the  tree  or plant  on  which  it  grows.  The  (tehder  stem)  of  the Madhu-Shigru  is  pungent  in  taste  and  subdues  the deranged  Kapham.
The  Kshavaka,  the  Kulechara,  and  the  tender sprouts  of  Vansha^  etc.,  generate  the  deranged  Kapham, and  tend  to  increase  the  discharge  of  stool  and urine.
Metrical  Texts  : — The  Kshavakam  helps  the germination  of  worms  in  the  intestines.  It  is  slimy  and sweet  in  taste,  and  tends  to  increase  the  secretions  of the  internal  organs.  It  generates  the  Vfiyu  and  does not  inordinately  increase  the  Pittam  and  Kapham  in the  body.  The  tender  sprouts  of  Venu  generate Kapham  and  are  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion.  The}' can  be  but  imperfectly  digested  and  produce  the  Vayu in  the  organism.  They  ha-se  a  slightly  astringent  taste and  tend  to  produce  a  state  of  extreme  parchedness  in the  system.
The  Udbhida  Group  :— Mushrooms  are generally  found  to  grow  on  stacks  of  straw  (Paiala), or  are  seen  vegetating  on  the  stems  of  bamboo  (^Venu)  or sugar-cane  (Ikshu  ,  or  as  sprouting  up  from  beneath  tlie surface  of  the  ground  (Udbhida),  or  growing  on  a heap  of  decomposed  cow- dung  (Karisha.)  Of  these, those     which    grow    on    stacks   of  (decomposed)  straw
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^23
(Palalam)  are  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion  and  tend  to produce  a  state  of  dryness  in  the  organism.  They subdue  the  three'deranged  humours  of  the  body.  Those which  vegetate  on  the  stems  of  sugar-canes  (Ikshujam) have  a  sweet  pungent  taste.  They  leave  an  asti'ingent after-taste  in  the  mouth  and  are  cooh'ng  in  their potency.  Mushrooms  growing  on  decomposed  cow- dung  (Karisha)  should  be  regarded  as  possessed  of properties  similar  to  those  of  the  preceding  class.  They aggravate  the  Vayu,  are  heat-making  in  their  potency, and  have  an  astringent  taste.  Those  which  vegetate  on the  stems  of  bamboos  (Venuja)  have  an  astringent  taste and  tend  to  enrage  or  aggravate  the  bodily  Vaj^u. ^Mushrooms  which  grow  on  the  ground  (Bhumija)  are heav}'  of  digestion  and  do  not  inordinately  generate the   V^yu,  their   tastes    varying   according   to   the  soil
they  grow  on.
•
Pinya'ka  Group  : — The*  Pinyaka  {levigated pov,'deror  cake  of  linseed  or  mustard  pressed  in  an oil-mill),  the  Tilakalka  (the  levigated  powder  of sesamum  of  which  the  oil  has  been  similarly  pressed out),  and  the  Sthunika-shuska-Shaka  (leaves  and  stems of  plants  pasted  and  made  into  pills  or  balls)  tend  to enrage  all  the  deranged  humours.
IVIctrical  Texts: — Sthunika  balls  are  long retained  in  the  stomach  in  an  undigested  state, thus   giving  rise   to   a   distension   of  that   organ,   and
^24  '^HP:  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [Chap.  xlm.
tend  to  enrage  or  aggravate  the  bodily  Vayu. Moist  Sindakis  are  the  (leaves  and  stems  of  the Mulaka,  etc.  slightly  boiled  and  pasted  with  pungent and  aromatic  spices  and  then  made  into  balls.) There'  are  two  kinds  of  Sindakis  the  dr}--  and  the moist.  They  generate  the  Ysiyu  and  are  appetising, and  tend  to  impart  a  greater  relish  to  food.  All sweet  or  palatable  potherbs  are  purgative  and  heavy of  digestion,  produce  a  state  of  dryness  in  the  organism, are  generally  indigestible  and  long  retained  in  the stomach  in  an  undigested  state,  causing  it  to  distend. They  are  marked  with  a  shade  of  the  astringent  in their  taste.
or  flowers,  leaves,  fruits,  stems  and  bulbs,  each succeeding  one  is  hea^  ier  (of  digestion)  than  the  one immediately  preceding  it  in  the  order  of  enumeration. Potherbs  and  leaves  of  edible  plants  which  are  found to  be  rough  or  pu.trified  or  worm-eaten,  as  well  as those  growing  on  an  improper  or  incongenial  soil,  or making  their  appearance  in  an  unnatural  season  of the  year,  should  be  rejected  as  unfit  for  use.  This ends  the  description  of  the  Pushpa-shakas.
The  Bulb  Group  :— Now  we  shall  discourse on  the  virtues  of  edible  bulbous  plants  or  herbs  (Kandas). The  bulbs  of  plants  and  creepers  such  as  the  \'idari-kanda, Shatavari,  Visha  (bulbs  of  the  lotus  plant),  Mrinala  (the upper  stem  of  the  lotus  plant), ^Shringataka,  Kasheruka,
Chap.  XLVI.J  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
525
Pindaluka,  Madhvaluka,  Hastyaluka,  Kasthaluka, Shankhaluka,  Raktdluka,  Indivara  and  Utpala  etc. alleviate  lifemo^tysis,  are  cooling  in  their  potenc)', sweet  in  their  taste  and  lieavy  of  digestion.  The}" tend  to  increase  the  semen  in  large  quantities  and augment  the  quantity  of  milk  in  the  breast  of  a human  mother.  The  bulb  known  as  the  Vid^ri- Kanda  has  a  sweet  taste,  and  acts  as  a  construc- tive tonic  and  is  spermatopoietic.  It  is  cooling  in  its potency,  beneficial  to  the  ^oice,  and  imparts  strength to  the  system.  It  is  extremely  diuretic  and  subdues  the Vayu  and  Pittam,  The  Shatavari  has  a  sweet  and bitter  taste  and  is  spermatopoietic.  It  subdues  the Vayu  and  Pittam,  the  one  belonging  to  the  large- sized  species  being  palatable  and  appetising  and tonic.     The   latter   improves   the  intellect   and  proves
curative  in   cases     of   mesenteric    diarrhoea   (Grahani)
* and  piles,  and  is  spermatopoietic,  Rejuvenating,  restora- tive, and  cooling  in  its  potency.  The  under-sprouts of  this  creeper  (large-sized  Shatavari)  have  a  bitter taste  and  subdue  the  Pittam  and  Kapham.  The Visham*  proves  curative  in  cases  of  haemoptysis, and  is  long  retained  in  the  stomach  in  an  undigested state,  though  it  falls  under  the  category  of  sub- stances    which    can    be     but     partially    digested.     It
*  Bulbs  of  lotus  plants — though  certain  authorities  aver  that  the  inner lining  or  membranous  fibres  of  a  lotus-stem  are  called  Visha,  the outer  covering  being  known  as  the  MrinSlam,
526
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLVI.
is  tasteless  or  insipid,  generates  the  Va3'u,  and  is  hard to  digest,  producing  a  condition  of  dryness  in  the organism.  The  bulbs  known  as  the  "Shringataka  and the  Kasheruka  are  heavy  of  digestion,  are  long  re- tained '  in  the  stomach  in  an  undigested  state,  and are  cooling  in  their  potency.  The  Pindalukam  gener- ates the  Kapham,  is  heavy  of  digestion,  and  tends  to enrage  or  agitate  the  bodily  Vayu.  The  Surendrakanda is  pungent  in  digestion,  generates  the  Pittam  and  sub- dues the  Kapham.  The  sprouts  of  the  Venn  are  heavy of  digestion,  and  tend  to  enrage  the  Kapham  and  V^3'u.
The  bulbs  (Kanda)  known  as  Sthula-Kanda,  Shurana- Kanda,  and  Manaka,  etc.  have  a  slightly  astringent and  pungent  taste,  and  tend  to  produce  a  state  of dryness  in  the  organism.  They  are  heav}'  of  digestion, and  subdue  the  Pittam,  and  are  long  retained  in  the stomach  in  an  undigested  condition.
Metrical  texts  :  The  species  known  as  the Manaka  is  sweet,  and  cooling  in  its  potency  and heavy  of  digestion,  while  the  one  called  the  Sthula Kanda. is  not  inordinately  heat-making  in  its  potency. The  species  Surana  is  usually  found  to  be  curative in  cases  of  piles  and  rectal  polypi  and  condylomata. The  bulbs  of  such  aquatic  plants  as  the  Kumuda, Utpala  and  Padma  have  an  astringent  taste  and are  sweet  in  digestion.  They  are  cooling  in  their potency   and    tend   to   enrage   the    Vayu     and   yacify
Chap.  XLVL]  SUTRASTHANAM.
527
or  subdue  the  deranged  Pittam.  The  bulb  known  as the  Vrahakanda  is  pungent  in  taste  and  digestion, and  is  possessed  of  spermatopoietic,  tonic^  rejuvenating and  restorative  properties.  It  subdues  the  Kapham, and  proves  efficacious  in  cases  of  MehU,  skin diseases  (Kushtham),  and  in  aihuents  due  to  the presence  of  parasites  in  the  intestines.  The  top- piths  of  such  trees,  as  the  Tala,  Narikela,  Kharjura etc.,  are  sweet  in  taste  and  digestion.  They  prove curative  in  cases  of  haemoptysis,  and  are  spermato- poietic. They  subdue  the  Vayu  and  generate  the Kapham  in  the  body.  Edible  bulbs,  which  are  ex- tremel}'  tender  or  immature,  diseased,  decomposed  or sprouting  in  an  improper  season  of  the  year,  or  are worm-eaten,  should  be  rejected  as  unfit  for  use.  This finishes  the  description  of  the  bulb  group.
The  Salt  Gnoup  (Lavana  Varga)  :— The different  varieties  of  salt  such  as  the  Saindhava,  the Samudra,  the  Vida,  the  Sauvarchala,  the  Romaka  and the  Audbhidam  (prepared  from  vegetable  alkah),  etc., should  be  successively  deemed  as  more  heat,  Vayu, Kapham,  and  Pittam  making,  and  more  demulcent, sweeter  and  more  purgative  and  diuretic,  considered  in the  inverse  order  of  enumeration.
Saindhava  salt  is  beneficial  to  the  eyes,  palatable, relishing,  light,  appetising,  demulcent,  slightly  sweet in     digestion,    spermatopoietic     and     cooling     in     its
528  "I'HE  StTSHRUTA  SAMHlTA.       [Chap.  XLVi.
potency.  It  is  one  of  the  most  potent  auxiliaries in  combating  the  action  of  the  deranged  humours of  the  body.  The  variety  called  the  Samudram (sea-brine)  is  sweet  in  digestion,  and  not  inordi- nately neat-making  in  its  potency.  It  is  not  indiges- tible, but  purgative,  slightly  demulcent,  and  does  not  in- ordinately generate  the  Pittam,  and  is  good  in  attacks  of colic  pain  (Shula).  The  variety  known  as  Vida  salt  is a  little  alkaline  (in  its  taste)  and  is  appetising.  It  tends to  produce  a  condition  of  dryness  in  the  organism, and  proves  beneficial  in  cases  of  colic  (Shula,)  and  in  dis- eases affecting  the  heart.  It  imparts  a  relish  to  food,  is sharp  and  heat-making  in  its  potency,  and  restores  the deranged  bodily  Vayu  to  its  normal  state  (restoring  or setting  aflow  the  nerve-current  by  removing  any obstruction).  Sauvarchala  salt  is  light  of  digestion, heat-making  in  its  potency,  and  pungent  in  taste.  It  is appetising,  has  an  agreeable  aroma,  removes  any  viscid- ness  from  the  internal  organism,  and  proves  curative  in cases  of  abdominal  glands,  colic  pain  and  incarceration of  scybala  in  the  bowels.  Romaka  salt  is  sharp and  intensely  heat-making.  Its  action  permeates the  whole  system  immediately  after  its  use,  and  is pungent  and  light  of  digestion.  It  subdues  the Vayu,  tends  to  increase  the  secretion  of  the  internal organs,  enters  into  the  minutest  capillaries  of  the body,  and  is  purgative  and  diuretic.  Audbhida salt   is   light,    sharp,   and   heat- making  in  its   potency.
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^29
It  acts  as  a  moistener  to  the  internal  organs,  has  a  pung- ent bitter  taste,  and  is  charged  with  a  small  quantity  of alkali.  It  permeates  the  minutest  capillaries,  and  tends to  restore  the  deranged  Vayu  to  its  normal  condition. Gutika  salt  destroys  the  deranged  Vayu  and  K^pham, and  is  vermifugal,  appetising,  digestant  and  purgative. It  tends  to  aggravate  the  Pittam  and  acts  as  an  inter- nal liquefacient  or  antifat.  The  salt  quarried  from  a  salt mine  situated  at  the  foot  of  a  hill  (Shailamulaja),  or  from a  sandy  (Valukelam)  or  alkaline  soil  (Ushakshara\ has  a  pungent  taste,  and  helps  the  disintegration  of Kapham,  etc.  (Chhedi).  It  is  also  called  pungent (Katu)  salt.
The  group  of  Alkalis  .—The  different varieties  of  alkali  (Kshara)  such  as  the  Javakshara vCarbonate  of  potash),  the  Svarjikakshara^  the  Pakima and  the  Tankana  cifre  abdominal  glands,  piles, mesenteric  diarrhoea,  and  gravel  and  stone  in the  bladder.  All  these  varieties  of  alkali  should be  regarded  as  possessed  of  digestant  or  stomachic properties.  Their  abuse  is  known  to  have  brgught about  cases  of  hcemoptysis.  Of  these_,  the  varieties known  as  the  Javakshara  and  Svarjikakshara  are inflammatory  as  fire,  and  they  tend  to  reduce  Kapham, remove  Vibondha  (suppression  of  stool  etc.),  piles,  and abdominal  glands  and  prove  curative  in  cases  of  enlarged spleen.    They   are     anti-spermatopoietic.    The    alkali
67
^^O  THE  Sl'SHKUTA  SAMHITA'.       [Chap.  XL\i.
known  as  Usharaksliara  is  heat-making  in  its  potency, and  subdues  the  deranged  V^yu.  It  tends  to  increase the  shmy  (mucous;  secretions  in  the  organs  and  is  detri- mental to  the  strength  of  the  body.  The  variety  called P^kima  tends  to  reduce  obesity,  causes  a  free and  increased  discharge  of  urine,  thus  full}-  reliev- ing the  bladder  of  all  its  contents  (lit  :  bladder-cleanser). The  alkali  known  as  the  Tankanakshdra  (borax)  tends to  produce  a  condition  of  dryness  in  the  organism, generates  the  Vayu,  subdues  the  Kapham,  and  is  appe- tising in  its  property.  It  is  moreover  known  to  bring about  a  derangement  of  tlie  Pittam.  and  is  sharp  in  its potency.
The  lYletal  group: --Gold  has  a  sweet  ;uid agreeable  taste,  acts  as  a  tonic  or  restorative  elixir,  im- parts rotundity  to  tlie  body,  and  subdues  the  action of  all  the  three  deranged  humours  of  the  body.  It  is cooling  and  antitoxic  in  its  potency  and  invigorates the  eyesight.  Silver  has  an  acid  taste,  is  laxative  and cooling  (in  its  potency),  presents  a  glossy  or  oily  aspect, and  destroys  the  Pittam  and  Vayu,  Copper  has  a  sweet and  astringent  taste,  and  acts  as  a  liquefacient  and  corro- sive agent.  It  is  laxative  and  cooling  in  its  ]~)otency. Kansya  Indian  bell -metal)  has  a  bitter  taste,  and  acts as  a  liquefacient  agent.  It  subdues  the  Kapham  and Vayu,  and  is  beneficial  to  the  eyesight.  Iron  generates Vayu,  is  cooling  in  its  potency,  allays  thirst  and  subdues
Chap.  XLVi.]  StJTRAStHANAM.  ^31
the  deranged  Pittam  and  Kapham.  Zinc  and  lead  are vermifugal,  as  well  as  liquefacient  and  corrosive.  They have  a  saline  tas*e.  Pearls,  corals,  diamonds,  sapphires, Vaidurya  (lapis  lazuli),  crystals,  etc.  are  beneficial  to the  sight,  and  cooling  in  their  potency.  They  ar«  anti- toxic and  act  as  liquefacient  or  corrosive  agents. They  are  possessed  of  sacred  prophylactic  virtues,  and bring  good  luck  to  men  who  wear  them,  and  cleanse their  wearers  from  all  impurities.  Thus  the  description of  the  salt  group  is  ended.
IVIetrical  texts  : —The  intelligent  shall  deter- mine the  properties  of  cereals,  flesh,  fruits,  potherbs, etc.,  (other  than  those  described  under  their  respective heads  in  the  present  chapter),  which  should  be  deter- mined with  the  help  of  their  respective  tastes,  as well  as  from  the  nature  of  the  predominant  material principles  which  enter  *  into  their  composition.  The Shastika,  barley,  wheat,  Rakta-Shali,  and  the  pulses such  as  the  Mudga,  the  Adhakia,  and  the  Masura should  be  regarded  as  the  best  and  by  far  the  most nutritious  of  the  cereals  which  fall  under  the  respective heads  of  the  Paddy  Group  (Dhanyavarga).  The  flesh of  the  Lava,  Tittiri,  Saranga,  Kuranga,  Ena,  Kapin- jala,  Mayura  (peacock),  Varmi  and  Kurma  (tortoise) should  be  regarded  as  the  best  of  those  of  all  other  ani- mals respectively  belonging  to  their  own  species.  Of fruits,    those    called    Dddimva,     A'malaka,    Drdkshd,
532
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.       [Chap.  XLVI.
Kharfura,  Parushaka,  Rcijddana  and  ■  Mdtulunga should  be  considered  as  the  most  commendable and  efficacious.  Of  potherbs  those-  known  as  the Satma,  Vdstiika,  ChuchcJmka,  Chilli,  Mulaka-Potikd, Mandi'ikaparnij  and  Jivanti  should  be  regarded  as possessed  of  the  most  commendable  properties.  Cow's milk  is  the  best  of  milks,  and  similarly,  clarified  butter made  from  the  milk  of  a  cow  should  be  considered  as pre-eminently  the  best  and  the  most  efficacious  of clarified  butters.
Saindhava  salt  is  the  best  of  all  other  salts. Dhdtri  and  Dddhnva  fruit  are  the  best  of  all the  acid  kinds  ;  Pippali  and  Ndgara  of  all  pungent, and  Patola  and  Vdrtdkam  of  all  bitter  vegetable substances.  Honey  and  clarified  butter  occupy the  highest  place  in  the  list  of  all  sweet  articles. Pugaphalam  and  Parushakam  are  the  best  of  all astringent  fruit.  Sugar  is  pre-eminently  the  best  of all  the  modifications  of  the  sugar-cane  juice,  while Madvirka  and  Asava  (grape-juice)  are  the  best  of  all cordials.  Similarly,  the  corn  (lit :  paddy)  of  a  year's standmg  or  matured  for  a  year  after  being  harvested, is  the  most  efficacious.  The  flesh  of  a  young  animal, as  well  as  well-cooked  rice  prepared,  that  day,  fully ripe  fruit,  and  fresh  and  tender  potherbs  should  be deemed  as  the  best  of  their  respective  kinds.
The  kritarina  varga  :- Now  we  shall  fully
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  533
deal  with  the  properties  of  cooked  and  prepared food  (Kritaniias).  A  gruel  (Manda)  of  fried  paddy seasoned  with  ^/owdered  Pippali  and  Nagara  proves  a wholesome  diet  to  a  patient  after  the  exhibition  of  pur- gatives and  emetics,  inasmuch  as  it  is  digestantf  appeti- sing and  agreeable,  and  tends  to  restore  the  bodily  Vayu to  its  normal  condition.  Peyd  is  diaphoretic,  appetising, light  of  digestion,  diuretic  (lit  :  bladder-cleanser).  It allays  thirst  and  hunger,  and  tends  to  remove  the  sense of  fatigue  and  exhaustion.  It  serves  to  rekindle  an impaired  appetite  and  restore  (lit :  soothes  down)  the deranged  Vayu  to  its  normal  condition.  Vilepi  acts  as an  emulcent  food  and  soothes  the  entire  organism.  It  is tonic,  and  imparts  strength  and  rotundity  to  the  frame. It  is  light,  astringent,  appetising,  agreeable,  quenches thirst  and  satisfies  hunger.  The  Yavdgii,  when  cooked with  meat,  potherbs  and  fruit,  is  hard  to  digest.  It  is otherwise  agreeable,  soothing,  s}iermatopoietic,  tissue- building,  and  tonic.  ]\Ianda  is  prepared  by  carefully excluding  all  the  residuar)-  shreds  of  its  component substances,  while  Peya  is  cooked  without  any  such exclusion.  A  gruel,  which  abounds  with  such^  seedy shreds,  is  called  Vilepi,  while  the  variety,  which  is slightly  fluid  and  extremel}'  seedy  in  its  consistency, is  named  Yavagu.  The  preparation  known  as  the Payasa  (a  sort  of  porridge  cooked  by  boihng  rice with  milk  and  sugar)  is  long  retained  in  the  stomach in    an     undigested   state   and     is    heavy   of   digestion,
534  T'HE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.      [  Chap.  XLVi.
though  it  tends  to  impart   strength   to  the  body,  and generates  fat  and  Kapham  in  the  organism.
The  dish  called  Krishara  (a  gruel  cooked  by  boiling rice  with  flesh  and  sesamum)  generates  the  Kapham  and Pittam,  imparts  strength  to  the  body,  and  subdues  the Va5''u.  A  meal  consisting  of  white  coloured,  well threshed,  sweet  smelling  rice,  which  has  been  washed with  care  and  properly  boiled,  and  well  strained afterwards,  is  digested  with  ease  and  in  the  shortest space  of  time,  in  the  event  of  it  being  eaten hot  or  warm.  On  the  contrary,  a  meal  consisting of  uncleansed  and  unwashed  rice  improperly  boiled and  taken  cold  without  having  been  properly  strained takes  a  longer  time  to  be  digested.  Fried  rice  is light  and  aromatic,  and  generates  the  Kapham.  Rice boiled  and  cooked  with  clarified  butter  or  any such  fatty  substance,  as  well  as  with  meat,  acid  fruits, or  with  any  kind  of  pulse,  forms  a  rich  and  hea^•^• food  which  helps  to  build  up  new  tissues,  and  imparts strength  and  rotundity  to  the  body.  Rice  boiled and  cooked  with  milk  (in  a  manner  other  than that  of  preparing  the  Payasa)  acquires  properties similar  to  those  of  the  preceding  one.  A  soup  made of  anv  sort  of  fried  pulse  (such  as  the  Mudga, etc.!  without  its  husks  is  light  and  wholesome. Similarly,  potherbs  (Shakas)  well  boiled  and  well squeezed  and   subsquently  cooked  with  oil  or  any  ohter
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  ^35
lardaceous  substance  are  wholesome,  while  those  which are  cooked  in  a  different  manner  should  be  considered as  possessed  of  Contrary  virtues.
Meat  is  naturally  spermatopoietic  and  jmparts gloss  and  strength  to  the  system.  Moreover,  that which  has  been  cooked  and  prepared  with  clarified butter,  curd,  sour  gruel  (Kanjika),  acid  fruits (as  the  pomegranate  etc.)  pungent  and  some  aromatic condiment,  (as  black  pepper,  etc.)  should  be  considered as  a  very  wholesome  diet,  though  heavy  of  digestion. It  is  possessed  of  relishing,  strength-giving  and  tissue- building  properties.
The  condensed  soup  or  extract  of  the  afore  said meat,  thickened  with  milk  curd  and  clarified  butter, and  seasoned  and  cooked  with  such  aromatic  condi- ments (as  black  pepper,  asafoetida,  etc.),  tends  to aggravate  the  Pittam  and  Kapham,  and  acts  as  an appetising,  constructive  tonic.  The  meat,  which  has been  several  times  fried  with  clarified  butter  and  then boiled  in  warm  water  and  afterwards  prepared  dry  with such  condiments  as  Jiraka,  etc.  (so  as  to  have  all  the butter  and  seasonings  fully  absorbed  in  its  body — Parishushka-Mansa)  should  be  considered  as  a  tooth- some, exhilarating,  emulcent  food,  though  heavy  of  diges- tion. It  imparts  firmness  to  the  limbs  and  increases  a relish   for  food,   improves   the   appetite   and   intellect,
536  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [  Chap.  XLVI.
builds  up  fresh  tissues,  gives  rotundity  to  the frame,  and  produces  an  increased  quantity  of  semen and  (ojas)  albumen  in  the  organism.  Tue  meat  cooked and  prepared  in  the  foregoing  manner,  when  minced and  made  into  cakes,  is  called  Ullupta-Mansam, which  resembles  the  above-said  Parishushka-Mansam in  its  properties,  though  it  is  lighter  than  the  latter  owing to  the  fact  of  its  having  been  cooked  over  a  charcoal  fire. The  same  meat,  cooked  on  an  iron  rod  over  a  charcoal fire,  becomes  a  little  heavier  as  far  as  digestion  is concerned,  inasmuch  as  it  is  roasted  with  clarified butter,  etc.
The  varieties  of  cooked  meat  such  as,  the  Ullupta (minced  meat),  the  Bharjita  (fried),  the  Pishta  (made into  balls  or  cakes),  the  Pratapta  (roasted  with  clarified butter  over  a  charcoal  fire),  the  Kandupachita  (dipped  in mustard  oil  and  powdered  aroiuatic  condiments  and roasted  and  done  to  a  honey  colour  over  a  charcoal  fire), the  Parishuska  and  the  Pradigdha  go  by  the  general name  of  Shulyam  (cabob).  Of  the  varieties  of Shulyam,  those  which  are  boiled  with  oil  should  be considered  as  heat-making  in  their  potency,  heavy  of digestion  and  as  generating  the  Pittam,  Avhile  those, which  have  been  fried  with  clarified  butter,  should be  regarded  as  light,  appetising,  agreeable,  relishing, beneficial  to  the  eyes,  and  cooling  in  their  potenc}'. They  also   subdue  the  Pittam  and  are  pleasant  to  the
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^^j
taste.*  A  tbin  meat  soup  is  a  pleasant  tonic,  and  proves beneficial  in  cases  of  dyspnoea,  cough,  and  consumption. It  subdues  the  Pittam  and  Kapham,  destroys  the  V^yu, and  has  an  agreeable  taste.  It  is  wholesome  to  persons of  weak  memory  and  reduced  semen,  as  well  as  to  those suffering  from  cachexia  peculiar  to  chronic  fever,  from general  emaciation  of  the  body,  from  ulcerative  endo- carditis (Urakshata;,  or  from  diseases  affecting  the  voice or  the  albumen  (ojas).  It  is  known  to  bring  about  an adhesion  and  reduction  of  fractured  and  dislocated  bones, and  increases  the  quantity  of  semen  and  oja  (albumen) in  subjects  found  wanting  in  those  two  important principles  of  hfe.  Meat-soup,  prepared  with  the  juice of  the  Dadima,  etc.,  and  seasoned  with  pungent condiments,  increases  the  quantity  of  semen  and  tends to  subdue  the  action  of  all  the  three  deranged  humours of  the  body.
The  use  of  meat  of  which  tjie  essence  has  been previously  extracted  fails  to  contribute  to  the  growth and  strength  of  the  organism,  and  is  long  retained  in  an
*  Addifional  text  : — In  the  dish  known  as  the  Prataptam,  the  meat is  first  fried  with  clarified  butter,  then  pasted  and  flavoured  with  the addition  of  curd,  pomegranate-juice  etc.  and  is  again  cooked  with  clarified butler,  Ajaji,  and  Sdmudra  salt  over  a  charcoal  fire,  each  of  the  preceding substances  being  added  to  it  in  succession  during  cooking  over  a  gridiron. Meat  luted  with  sesamum  paste  and  cooked  with  the  addition  of  flavouring condiments  to  a  honey  colour  is  called  Kandupakkam,  while  the  one  soaked in  asafoetida  and  water  and  cooked  over  a  gridiron  over  a  smokeless  fire  by sprinkling  water  over  it  with  the  addition  of  pomegranate  juice,  etc,  is called  Shulyam.
68
538
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.       [Chap.  XLVI.
undigested  state  in  the  stomach  and  impairs  digestion. It  is  insipid,  generates  the  Vayu  in  the  organism, and  tends  to  produce  a  state  of  parthedness  in  the body.  The  dish  known  as  the  Khanshka  Mansa  (a kind  ©f  dried  meat)  is  very  hard  to  digest  (heavy  of digestion)  and  proves  wholesome  only  to  men  of  strong digestive  powers.  The  cooked  meat  called  the  Veshavara (boneless  boiled  meat  subsequently  pasted  and  cooked with  treacle,  clarified  butter,  black  pepper,  Pippali,  and Shunthi,  etc.)  is  heav}-  of  digestion,  demulcent,  strength- giving,  and  alleviates  diseases  due  to  the  action  of  the angry  V^yu.  The  dish  known  as  the  Samira  is  soothing to  all  the  fundamental  principles  of  the  organism.  It specially  removes  parchedness  of  the  mouth,  allays thirst  and  hunger,  and  is  palatable  and  cooling  in  its potency.
Mudga  soup  subdues  the  .Kapham,  and  is  appe- tising and  agreeable.  It  forms  the  most  wholesome diet  to  persons  whose  systems  have  been  cleansed  with the  aid  of  purgative  and  emetic  remedies,  as  well as  to  those  suffering  from  ulcers.  The  soup  known  as the  Raga-Shadava  (which  is  another  name  for  Mudga soup  prepared  with  grapes  and  expressed  pomegranate- juice'  is  light,  and  imparts  a  relish  to  food.  It  is not  hostile  to  the  deranged  humours  of  the  bodv but  slightly  subdues  their  action).  The  soup  of  the Masura,    or    of  the    ]\Iudga,    or   of  the     Godhuma    or
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  53^
of  the  Kiilattha  pulse,  prepared  with  salt  is  inhostile to  the  Pittam  and  Kapham,  and  is  specially  re- commended in  nervous  diseases  (Vata-Vyadhi  .  The soup  of  the  Masura  etc.,  cooked  and  prepared  with  raisins and  pomegranate-juice  is  beneficial  to  patients  suffering from  Vata-Vyadhi.  It  is  relishing)  appetising,  agreeable, and  light  (of  digestion).  Soups  of  Mudga,  etc., prepared  with  Patola  or  Ximva  tend  to  reduce  the quantity  of  fat  and  Kapham  in  the  organism,  subdue the  Pittam,  are  appetising  and  agreeable,  and  prove curative  in  cases  of  Kushtha  (cutaneous  affections)  and diseases  of  parasitic  origin.  Mudga  soup  prepared with  ^Nlulaka  removes  dyspnoea,  cough,  catarrh, water-brash,  fever  and  a  relish  for  food.  It  tends to  reduce  fat  and  Kapham  in  the  organism,  and  proves cm-ative  in  diseases  affecting  the  throat.
The  soup  of  the  Kula^tha  pulse  cures  diseases  due  to the  action  of  the  deranged  Vayu,  as  well  as  asthma, catarrh,  and  Tuni,  Pratituni,  cough,  piles,  abdominal glands  (Gulma  and  Udavarta.  Prepared  with  the expressed  juice  of  the  Dadima  or  Amalaka  it  acquires  an agreeable  taste,  pacifies  the  deranged  humours,  and  is light,  appetising  and  strength-giving  in  its  virtues.  It proves  curative  in  epilepsy  and  obesity,  and  subdues  the deranged  Vayu  and  Pittam.  Mudga  soup  cooked  with Amalakas  acquires  an  astringent  property,  and  proves beneficial  in  derangements  of  the  Kapham  and   Pittam.
^4o  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.        [Chap.  XLVI.
The  soups  of  the  Yava,Kola  and  Kulattha  pulses  destroy the  Vayu  and  are  beneficial  to  the  larynx.  Similarly, soups  of  all  the  pulses,  which  go  by  the  name  of  Shami- Dh^nyas,  increase  the  strength  and  rotundity  of  the body.  Khala  and  Kamvalika  soups  are  respectively agreeable  and  subdue  the  V^yu  and  Pittam.
All  soups  cooked  and  prepared  with  the  expressed juice  of  pomegranate  should  be  known  as  strength- giving,  demulcent,  and  heavy  of  digestion.  They subdue  the  Vayu  and  Pittam.  Soups,  made  and  flavoured acid  by  the  mixture  of  whey,  produce  the  Pittam and  tend  to  vitiate  the  blood  and  besides  aggravate  the effects  of  anv  imbibed  poison  lurking  in  the  system.
The  soups  and  gruels  respectively  known  iis  the Kharayusha,*  the  Khara-Yavagu,t  the  ShadavaJ  and the  Panaka  should  be  prepared  with  the  advice,  and according  to  the  instmctions  of  a  physician.  The  soup, which  is  cooked  or  prepared  without  the  admixture of  anv  salt,  condiments  (black  pepper,  pungent spices^  or  any  oily  or  lardaceous  substance,  is  called the  Akrita-Yusha  (unseasoned  soup),  whereas  the  one which   is   cooked     and     seasoned    witli   the   foregoing
*  Mudga  soup  prepared  with  whej',  horse-apple,  Amrul  (oxalic corniculata),  cumin  seeds,  black  pepper  and  the  roots  of  Chit  A  (Plumbago Zeylanica).
t  Gruel  prepared  in  the  manner  of  Khara-Yusha.
t  Mudga  soup  in  the  composition  of  which  things  of  sweet,  saline, astringent,  acid  and  pungent  tastes  largely  enter,
Chap.  XLVI.  J  SUTRASTHAXAAI.  ^^l
spices  and*  substances  oil,  clarified  butter,  etc.,  is called  a  seasoned  soup  (Krita  Yusha).  Of  the  soups  and extracts  of  meat  respectively  cooked  and  prepared  with the  modifications  of  cow-milk  (curd,  whey,  etc.),  Kanjika and  acid  fruits  (pomegranate,  etc.)  each  siltceeding variety  should  be  deemed  lighter  and  more  wholesome than  the  one  immediately  preceding  it  in  the  order  of enumeration.  The  soup  cooked  with  the  cream  of  the curd  and  the  expressed  juice  of  the  Dadima  is  called Kamvalika  soup.  Articles  of  food  prepared  withsesamum and  its  levigated  cake,  or  those  in  the  composition  of  which dried  pot  herbs,  rice  threshed  out  of  sprouting  paddy or  Sindaki  (a  species  of  potherbs  described  before)  enter, should  be  considered  as  hea\y  of  digestion.  They  subdue the  Pittam  and  increase  the  Kapham.  The  Vatakas resemble  the  Sindakis  in  their  properties,  but  are  heavy of  digestion  and  admit  of  being  incompletely  digested, giving  rise  to  a  kind  of  acid  re-acjtion.  The  varieties  of soups  known  as  the  Raga*  and  Shadava  are  light,  tissue- building,  spermatopoietic,  agreeable,  relishing,  and appetising  in  their  properties.  They  alleviate  thirst, epileptic  fits,  vertigo  and  vomiting,  and  remjove  the sense  of  fatigue  or  exhaustion.
The    variety    of  food    known    as  the  Rasalat  is  con-
*  Is  made  of  sugar,  Saindhava  sail,  tamarind,  Sarjikshdra,  Parushaka and  the  expressed  juice  of  Jambuline  fruits  ;  while  the  Shadava  soup  is prepared  with  salt  and  acid  and  sweet  fruits.
t  A  sweet  aromatic  preparation  consisting  of  acid  buftalo-curd,  refined sugar,  milk,  powdered  cardamom,  camphor  and  black  pepper.
542  THE  SUSHKUTA  SAMHITA.       [  Chap.  XLVI.
structive,  tonic,  demulcent,  spermatopoietic  and  relishing. Curd  sweetend  with  treacle  is  agreeable.  It  generates the  Vayu  in  tlie  system,  and  tends  to  increase  the  oily principle  in  the  organism.  Powdered  barley  soaked  in clarified'  butter  and  made  into  a  dough  with  water, which  is  neither  too  thick  nor  too  thin  in  its  con- sistency, is  called  Mantha,  which  acts  as  a  tonic immediately  on  it  being  partaken  of.  It  allays  thirst and  removes  the  sense  of  fatigue  and  exhaustion.  The Mantha,  treated  with  treacle  and  clarified  butter,  proves curative  in  cases  of  difficult  urination  and  obstinate Udavarta.  A  Mantha  prepared  with  sugar,  raisins (Drdksha)  and  the  expressed  juice  of  sugar-cane,  removes diseases  due  to  the  derangement  of  the  Pittam. Mantha,  containing  raisins  and  Madhuka  fruit,  success- fully combats  diseases  brought  about  tliroagh  the  action of  the  deranged  Kapham.  A  Mantha  saturated  with the  three  aforesaid  sybstances  (acid  and  lardaceous, sugar  and  raisins)  tends  to  restore  the  stool  to  its normal  condition.
Th^  Pariakas  :— Well  diluted  treacle  (Panaka\ no  matter  whether  it  has  been  rendered  acid  or not  with  the  admixture  of  Amla  lemon  juice),  is  diuretic and  heavy  in  respect  of  digestion.  Water  saturated  with treacle,  Khanda  (unrefined  sugar),  sugar  or  gi-apes,  and made  acid  with  the  admixture  of  an}-  acid  substance, and   scented   with   camphor,    should   be    deemed   the
Chap.  XLVi.j  SUTRASTHA'NAM.  543
best  of  refrjsshing  beverages.  Water  saturated  with  the (expressed  juice  of)  grapes  removes  the  sense  of  fatigue, allays  thirst,  anfi  alleviates  epileptic  fits,  and  burning sensation  of  the  body.  Water  potion  flavoured  with  the (expressed  juice  of)  Kola  or  Parushaka  is  agreeable  and long  retained  in  the  stomach  in  an  undigested  state. The  lightness  or  heaviness  of  a  potion  (Panaka  should be  determined  according  to  the  quantities,  properties  and preparations  of  the  articles  and  substances  that  enter into  its  composition.  Here  ends  the  description  of  the specific  properties  of  Auiieties  of  prepared  food,  etc. (Kritanna).
Now  we  shall  describe  the  virtues  of  the  articles  of confectionary  according  to  their  tastes,  potencies,  and digestive  reactions.
Confectionary — Such  as  is  made  with  the modifications  of  milk^  is  called  the  Kshira  Bhakshyas (flour  dissolved  and  stirred  in  n'ilk  with  sugar,  etc.) It  is  tonic,  spermatopoietic,  agreeable,  appetising  and aromatic,  and  tends  to  impart  rotundity  to  the  frame. It  subdues  the  Pittam  and  does  not  belong  to  the gi"Oup  of  inconpletely  digestibles.  Of  these,  the variet}'  known  as  the  Ghritapuras  articles  of  food prepared  bv  putting  clarified  butter  in  doughs  of corn-flour)  is  strength- giving  and  agreeable.  It  subdues the  Vayu  and  Pittam,  is  spermatopoietic,  and  heavy  of digestion,  and  tends  to  create  new  flesh  and  blood.   The
544
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.        [  Chap.  XLVi.
articles  of  food  known  as  the  Gaudikas  prepared  by  put- ting treacle  into  doughs  of  corn-flour)  are  flesh-making, spermutopoietic,    and   heavy   in   respect'    ©f    digestion. They  subdue   the    Vayu  and  Pittam  and   generate   the Kaphanr,  and  do  not  give  rise  to  any  reactionary  acidity after     digestion.     The     articles    of    food   bolonging  to the  groups  of  Madhumastakas,  Sanyavas,  and  Pupas,  are heavy   in    respect   of  digestion  but  are  flesh  building  in their  properties.     Modakas   are    extremely  indigestible. Sattakas   (curd   cream  saturated  with   unrefined  sugar and  powdered    Trikatus,    and     then     filtered   through a  piece  of  clean  linen,  and   seasoned  with  camphor  and pomegranate  seeds)  impart  a  relish  to   the    food.     They are  appetising,  beneficial  to  the  voice,  heavy  in  respect of  digestion,   extremely   palatable  and  strength-giving. They    subdue   the  Vayu  and  Pittam  (Kapham  accord- ing  to  others  .    Vishyandana*   is   agreeable,   aromatic, sweet     and   demulcent.     It   destroys    the   Vayu,     and generates   the    Kapham  and   is   heavy,    and     strength- giving.      Articles    of  food   or   confectionary    made    of powdered   wheat    (Samita    act  as   constructive   tonics, and  subdue  the  Vayu  and  Pittam.     Of  these,  the  variety known    as   tlie   Phenaka     Khdja     of    our  present-day confectioners)  is  agreeable,    extremely   wholesome    and light.     Cakes   stuffed  with  Mudga-Veshavaras  are  long
*  Powdered  wheal  treated  with  milk,  clarified  butler  and  treacle,  and- made  into  a  paste  neillicr  to^T  «:l;ick  nor  too  ibin  in  its  consistency  is  called Vishyandana.
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^45
retained  in*  the  stomach  in  an  undigested  state,  while those  containing  minced  and  pasted  meat  (Veshav^ras) are  heavy  and  flesh  building  in  their  properties. Confectionary  known  as  the  Palalas  (a  preparation  of treacle,  pasted  sesamum  and  corn  flour)  generktes  the Kaphani  ;  while  the  Shashkulis  (Luchis  and  Kachuris of  our  modern  confectioners)  tend  to  increase  the Pittam  and  Kapham  in  the  organism.  Cakes  made of  powdered  rice  (Pishtakas  1  are  heat-making  in  their potency  and  tend  to  enrage  or  aggravate  the  Kapham and  Pittam.  They  further  give  rise  to  a  reactionary acidity  after  digestion,  and  are  specially  heavy  in  respect of  digestion,  and  are  slightly  strength-imparting.  Con- fectionary made  of  Vaidalas  (such  as  the  Mudga  pulse etc.)  has  an  astringent  taste,  is  light  in  respect  of digestion,  subdues  the  V^yu  and  Kapham,  is  pur- gative, and  tends  to  restore  the  Pittam  to  its  normal state,  though  apt  to  be  long  retained  in  the  stomach  in an  undigested  state.  Cakes  made  of  Masha  pulse are  tonic,  spermatopoietic  and  heavy  of  digestion. Similarly,  those  that  are  made  of  Kurchika  are  heavy in  respect  of  digestion  and  do  not  inordinately generate  the  Pittam.  Articles  of  confectionary  made of  sprouting  Mudgas,  etc.,  are  heavy  of  digestion, generate  the  Vayu  and  Pittam,  give  rise  to  a  re- actionary acidity  after  digestion,  and  tend  to  bring  on nausea  and  waterbrash  (Utklehsha),  besides  producing  a parched  condition  in  the  organism,  and  also  affecting 69
546  '^HE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA'.     [Chap.  XLvi.
the  eye-sight.  Confectionary  fried  in  clafified  butter has  an  agi-eeable  taste  and  aroma,  is  light, spermatopoietic,  and  tonic,  subdues  'the  Vayu  and Pittam,  and  tends  to  improve  the  complexion  and invigorate  the  eyesight.  Similarly,  that  which  is Iried  in  oil  is  heavy  as  regards  digestion,  pungent in  its  digestive  reaction,  and  heat-making  in  potency. It  destroys  the  A'ayu,  generates  the  Pittam  and  tends to  affect  tlie  sight  and  produces  cutaneous  affections. Confectionary  made  of  fruit,  meat,  modifications  of sugar-cane  juice  (treacle,  sugar,  etc.),  sesamum  and Masha  pulse  is  tonic,  heavy  of  digestion,  tissue- building  and  palatable.  Articles  of  food  fried  in broken  vessels  of  ])aked  clay,  or  cooked  over  a charcoal  fire  should  he  considered  as  light  in  respect of  digestion  and  as  possessed  of  the  ^■irtue  of  aggra- vating the  bodily  Vayu,  while  those  that  are  prepared with  lumps  of  curdled  milk  should  be  considered  as heavy  (of  digestion)  and  as  increasing  the  Kapham. Kulnidshas  ( half  boiled  Chanakas  or  gram)  generate  the A'ayu,  produce  loose  stool,  and  are  heavy  of  digestion, and  tend  to  produce  a  condition  of  parchedness  in tlie  organism.  Articles  of  food  made  of  fried  harlev (Vatyai  prove  curative  in  cases  of  Uda^■arta,  cough, cataiTh  and  Meha.  Dhana  fried  liarley)  and  Ulum\a (Mudga  pulse  etc.,  boiled  over  a  fire)  are  light  of digestion  and  absorb  the  excess  quantity  ot  fat and  Kapham  in  the  bod}-.    Barley  powder    (dissohed  in
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.  ^^y
water  so  as  to  form  a  sort  of  thin,  pasty  potion) is  flesh-building  and  spermatopoietic.  It  allays  thirst, acts  as  an  instantaneous  tonic,  subdues  the  Pittaui. Kapham  and  Vayu,  and  is  possessed  of  purgative  pro- perties. Made  into  thin  pasty  balls  or  lumps  the^' become  heavy  as  regards  digestion,  while  transformed into  a  thin  potion  with  the  addition  of  a  copious quantity  of  water  the}'  are  known  to  acquire  a  contrary virtue  (light).  Barley  powder  used  as  lambative  is easih^  and  speedily  digested  owing  to  the  softness  of its  consistency.  Fried  paddy  alleviates  vomiting  and dysenter}',  and  has  an  astringent  sweet  taste.  It is  appetising,  tonic,  and  light  of  digestion,  allays thirst,  constipates  the  bowels,  and  tends  to  restore  the deranged  Kapham  to  its  normal  condition.  Pulverised fried  paddy  alleviates  thirst,  vomiting,  and  a  burning sensation  of  the  skin,  arrests  perspiration,  and  proves curative  in  cases  of  hasgioptysis  and  Dahajvara  (a  type  of bilious  fever  characterised  b}-  unq\ienchable  thirst  and hyperpraxia).  Prithuka  (thrashed  or  pasted  paddy)  is heavy  of  digestion,  demulcent  and  flesh-building, and  increases  the  Kapham  in  the  system.  Taken with  milk  it  acts  as  a  tonic  and  is  laxative  and destroys  the  Vayu.  Immature  or  newly-harvested  rice has  a  sweet  taste,  is  hard  to  digest  and  acts  as  a  tissue- builder.  Old  or  well  matured  rice  brings  about  the adhesion  of  fractured  bones  and  proves  curative in  cases   of  Meha.     As   a   large   variety   of  substances
548
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.
[  Chap.  XLVI.
enters  into  the  composition  (of  our  daily  food\  a physician  should  prescribe  a  course  of  diet  for  his  patient after  carefully  considering  the  nature  of  the  food  stuffs and  the  properties  they  acquire  through  combination and  seasoning,  as  well  as  the  natural  longings  of  a person  for  a  certain  kind  of  food  during  the  preponder- ance of  certain  deranged  humours  of  the  body.
Anuparnam    or    After- Potions  :— Now
Nve  shall  discourse  on  drinks  and  potions  which  are found  to  be  beneficial  when  taken  after  a  certain  kind of  food  (Anup^nas.)
Certain  people  oppressed  with  an  acid  taste  naturally long  for  sweets,  while  others  in  full  satiet}"  of  sweet articles  have  a  relish  for  acid  things.  Hence  something acid  is  good  for  the  eater  of  sweets,  and  sweets  are  good for  men  who  have  partaken  of  an  acid  food.
Cold  water  and  warm  water>  Asava  ( wine),  Madya (spirits),  the  soup  of  Mudga  pulse  etc.,  the  juice  of  acid fruits,  sour  paddy  gruel,  milk  and  essence  of  meat are  generally  used  as  drinks  after  a  full  meal.  Of these,  that  alone  which  would  prove  beneficial  to  a person  should  be  given  him  in  an  adequate  quantity. The  intelligent  physician  should  determine  the  kind  of after- drink  (potion)  required  in  each  case  after  taking  into consideration  the  nature  of  the  disease  under  treatment, the  season  of  the  year,  and  the  properties  of  the  solid  or Hquid  substances  that  enter  into  the  composition  of  the
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
549
diet.  Of  all  kinds  of  after-potions,  clear  heavenly (atmospheric)  water,  kept  in  a  pure  vessel,  should  be deemed  the  bes^,  inasmuch  as  such  water  contributes  in every  way  to  the  welfare  (is  conducive  to  the  bodily growth)  of  a  person  throughout  his  life,  and  all  the  six different  tastes  are  inherent  in  that  heavenly  fluid. Briefl}^  we  have  stated  the  rule  to  be  observed  in  respect  of after-potions,  now  we  shall  dilate  upon  their  specific  pro- perties. Hot  water  should  be  taken  after  any  oih' or  lardaceous  substance  other  than  those  known as  the  oils  of  Bhallataka  and  Tauvaraka.  Certain authorities  hold  that  the  soup  of  Mudga  pulse  and  sour rice  gruel  (Kanjika)  should  be  respectively  taken  (in summer  and  winter)  after  having  taken  a  large quantity  of  oil  in  the  course  of  a  meal.  Cold  water should  be  taken  after  cakes  and  hone)-,  as  well  as after  curd,  Payasa  porridge,  and  also  in  cases  of poisoning  and  derangements  due  to  the  effects  of wine.  According  to  several  authorities  tepid  water should  be  taken  after  an}-  kind  of  cake  (preparation of  rice  paste  etc.)
Milk  or  meat  essence  should  be  prescri'bed  as an  after-potion  to  persons  habituated  to  meals  of  Shall-' rice  or  Mudga  pulse,  or  who  have  become  fatigued with  the  labours  of  a  battle  or  of  a  long  journey, or  w^ho  are  oppressed  with  the  heat  of  the  sun or   of   a   blazing  fire,  as  well  as    to  those  who  would
550  THE  SI\SHRUTA   SAMHITA.      [  Chap.  XLM.        J;
be   found   to   be  o^-ercome  from  the  effects  of  poison  or wine.    Sour  rice  gruel,  or  cream  of  curd  should  be  drunk after  having  taken  Masha  pulse,  etc.    W,me   (Madya)   is the  proper  after- drink  for  persons  addicted   to  it,  which is  also  recommended  alter  a  meat  diet.     Cold   water  or acid  fruit  juice  (such  as   that   of  the  pomegranate,  etc.) forms  the  best  after-drink  for  those  who  are  not  in   the habit   of    taking   wine.     Milk  is   ambrosia    to   persons enfeebled  with  arduous  study,  or  excessive  sexual   inter- course, and  to  every  one  after  an   exposure   to   the  sun after  a  long  troubled  journey.    Wine  (Sura)  is   the   after- drink  for  enfeebled  subjects,  and  water  saturated   with honey  is  the  potion  for  corpulent  persons.  Healthy  per- sons may  use  a  ^■ariety  of  desserts  and  beverages  during and  after  meals.     Things  which  are  demulcent  in    their virtues   and    heat-making  in    their   potency   should   be considered   as   a   wholesome   diet    in    diseases    due    to the    deranged    Vayu.       Substances,    which    are    heat- making   in  their  potetlcy  and  tend   to   produce   a    con- dition of  parchedness  (Ruksha)  in  the  organism,  should be  prescribed  as  a  wholesome  diet   in   diseases  brought about   through    the   action   of  the  deranged   Kapham. Similarly,  those  which  are  sweet    and   cooling   in  their potency,  prove  wholesome  in  Pittaja  distempers.     Milk and  the  expressed  juice  of  sugar-cane   are   beneficial  to persons  suffering  from  haemoptysis.    The  Asavas  (wines) of  the  Arka,  Shelu,  and  Shirisha  are  beneficial   to   those suffering  from  the  effects  of  any  poison.
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
55^
Now  wfe  shall  separately  describe  the  after-drinks to  be  taken  after  having  used  the  articles  of  food  dealt with  under  the  several  groups  discussed  before.  The  acid soup  of  Indian  Jujubes  (Kola)  should  be  taken  after a  meal  consisting  of  any  of  the  afore-said  cereAls  such as,  the  Shukadhanyam,  Kudhanyam,  etc.  Sour  gruel should  be  used  after  a  meal  of  Mudga  pulse,  or  of  any similar  grain.  The  Asa\a  (vN'ine  of  the  Pippali  should  be used  after  a  meal  of  the  long  thighed  venisons,  or  of the  flesh  of  those  of  the  Dhanvaja  family.  Kola and  Vadara  wines  should  be  used  after  having taken  the  cooked  flesh  of  the  fowls  of  the  \'ishkira species.  The  wine  of  Kshira-Vriksha  should  be  used after  a  meal  consisting  of  the  flesh  of  the  Pratuda species.  Cocoanut  and  date  palm  wines  should  be used  after  having  eaten  the  flesh  of  the  cave-dwelling .(guha-shaya)  species.  Krishna  Gandha  wine  should be  used  after  the  flesh  of  the  P^irna-Mriga  (arboreous) familv.  Ashvagandha  wine  should  be  taken  after the  flesh  of  the  Prasaha  species.  Phalasara  wine should  be  taken  after  the  flesh  of  any  of  the  hole- dwelling  (Vileshaya)  animals.  Triphala  wine  should  be taken  after  the  flesh  of  an  animal  with  unbifurcated^ hoops  (Ekashapha).  Khauira  wine  should  be  taken after  the  flesh  of  an  animal  with  bifurcated  hoofs.
The  Asava  (wine  of  Shringataka  or  Kasheruka  should be  taken  after  havmg  eaten  the  flesh    of  an    animal   of
552  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      [  Chap,  XLVi,
the  Kulechara  (frequenting  the  shores  of  lakes  etc.l species.  The  same  wines  should  be  regarded  as  proper after-potions  after  a  meal  consisting  of  molluscs (Koshastha),  or  of  the  flesh  of  an  animal  of  the  Padi (lizard)  family.  Asava  of  sugar-cane  (vinegar)  should  be taken  after  having  eaten  the  flesh  of  an  animal  of  the Plava  (diving)  family.  Mrinalam  wine  should  be taken  after  any  Nadeya  fish  (whose  habitat  is  the river).  Matulungu  wine  should  be  taken  after  the  flesh of  any  of  the  sea  fish  (Samudra).  Padma  (lotus  bulb), wine  should  be  taken  after  acid  fruits.  Pomegranate, or  Vetra  wines  should  be  taken  after  astringent  fruits. The  Asava  of  Kanda  [Khanda— D.  R.]  treated  with  the three  pungent  drugs  known  as  the  Trikatus  should  be taken  after  sweet  fruits.  Sour  and  fermented  rice  gruel should  be  taken  after  Tala  fruits,  etc.  The  wine  of Durva,  Nala,  or  of  Vetra  should  be  taken  after pungent  fruits.  The  Asava  of  Shvadanstra  or  of  Vasuka should  be  taken  after  Pippalis,  etc.  Darvi,  or  Karira wines  should  be  taken  after  Kushmandas,  etc.  The Asava  of  Lodhra  should  be  taken  after  taking  the Chuchchu,  potherbs  etc.  Triphala  wine  should  be taken  after  the  Jivanti,  potherbs,  etc.,  and  the  same rule  should  be  observed  in  respect  of  Kusumbha potherbs.
The  Asava  (wine)  of  the  drugs  known  as  the   Mahd Panchamula   should   be   taken   after  such   potherbs  as
Chap.  XLVI.]  SUTRASTHANAM.  553
the  Mandufta-parni,  etc.  Wines  of  acid  fruit  should  be taken  after  the  pitli  or  marrow  of  such  trees  as the  Date-pahn,  Tala,  etc.  The  wine  known  as  the Surasava,  or  fermented  rice  gruel  should  he  taken  after an  excess  of  Saindhava  salt,  etc.  Water  may  be*  taken in   absence   of  the   proper  after-drink  in  all  cases.
Authoritative  verses  on  the  sub- ject.— Atmospheric  or  rain  water  is  the  best  of  all drinks  and  cordials.  That  kind  of  water  is  whole- some to  a  person  to  which  he  is  habituated  from  his birth.  Hot  water  is  beneficial  in  derangements  of  the Vayu  and  Kapham,  and  cold  water  is  good  in  diseases which  have  their  origin  in  the  vitiated  blood,  or  in the  deranged  Pittam.  An  excessively  heavy  meal, as  well  as  the  one  which  usually  tends  to  derange the  fundamental  humours  of  the  body,  may  be  easily and  speedily  digested  with  the  help  of  a  suitable  after- drink.  A  proper  after-potion  taken  after  a  meal  brings on  a  fresh  relish  for  food,  increases  the  bulk  of  the body,  acts  as  a  spermatopoietic  beverage,  disintegrates the  combination  or  accumulation  of  the  deranged  bodily humours,  soothes  the  organism,  increases  the  softness of  the  body,  removes  the  sense  of  fatigue  and  exhaus- tion, brings  on  pleasurable  sensations  in  its  train, stimulates  the  appetite,  subdues  or  pacifies  the  deranged bodily  humours,  allays  the  thirst,  improves  the  com- plexion, and  imparts  tone  and  vigour  to  the  system.
70
554
THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XLVI.
Any  beverage  resorted  to  at  the  commencement  of  a meal  tends  to  produce  a  gradual  emaciation  of  the  frame; the  one  taken  during  the  course  of  a  meal  guards against  both  its  thinning  and  corpulency,  while  the  one drunk  at  the  close  of  a  meal  serves  to  greath'  add to  its  growth  and  rotundity.  Hence,  drinking  at  meals should  be  most  judiciously  determined  and  taken  with the  greatest  forethought  and  discretion.  The  food  carried down  into  the  stomach  of  a  person  unused  to  such liquids  long  retains  undigested  and  resists  being  con- verted into  chyme  or  being  digested,  and  becomes  a positive  source  of  discomfort.  Hence,  the  use  of  an  after- potion  is  imperatively  obligatory  on  all  human  beings, except  those  suffering  from  dyspnoea,  cough,  ulcerative endocarditis  ( Urahkshata),  ptyalism,  aphonia,  and from  diseases  affecting  the  part  of  the  body  situated above  the  clavicles.
After  the  use  of  an  after-potion,  a  long  walk,  a lengthy  conversation,  singing,  sleeping  and  reading should  be  refrained  from,  in  order  that  the  im.bibed potion  may  not  affect  the  stomach,  and  (aggravate  the bodily  humours)  which  taking  lodgment  about  the regions  of  the  throat  and  chest  may  give  rise  to  a secretion  of  mucous,  impair  the  appetite,  develop  such distressing  symptoms  as  vomiting  etc.,  and  produce  many other  distempers  as  well.
The  lightness  or  heaviness  of  a  food  stuff  does   not
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTkAS'l'HANAM.
555
go  contrary  to  nature.*  These  properties  depend  more upon  the  mode  of  cooking  or  preparing  them  than  upon the  nature  of  tl?e  substances  themselves;*  more  upon the  quantity  in  which  they  are  taken  than  the  mode  ol their  cooking  or  preparation  ;t  and  more  upon  the  food (ht.  boiled  rice)  itself  than  upon  the  quantity  of  its use, I  and  more  upon  the  time  (of  its  maturity)  than upon  the  food.§
The  question  of  lightness  or  heaviness  of  a  food stuff  affects  the  idle,  the  unhealthy,  the  luxurious, and  men  of  delicate  constitution  and  impaired  appe- tite, and  such  nice  discernment  of  the  properties  of  an article  of  food  is  not  imperatively  obligatory  on  strong, healthy  men  of  active  habits  and  good  healthy  digestion, who  are  habituated  to  hard  and  solid  fares,  and  who can  tolerably  afford  to  dispense  with  such  thoughts  , altogether.  Here  ends  the  description  of  the  group  of after-potions.  •
Hear  me,  O  my  child,  discourse  on  the   rules  to   be observed   in    connection    with    eating.       The  kitchen
*  If  it  be  asked  why  the  flesh    of  an    animal  of  the   Janigh^l?,  family  is light  ?     The  answer  would  be  because  il  is  naturally  so.
*  As  for  example,  Wihi  corn  is  naturally  heavy  of  digestion,  but* fried  Vribi  seeds  are  light,  t  As  for  instance,  a  heavy  food  should  be taken  till  the  appetite  is  but  half  satisfied,  while  an  article  which  is  light with  regard  to  digestion  may  be  eaten  to  satiety. J  As  for  instance, of  the  varieties  of  food  such  as  the  Manda,  Peya,  X'ilepi,  Bhakta  and Pishtaka,  each  succeeding  one  is  heavier  than  ihe  one  immediately  preceding it.§  As  for  example,  newly  hanested  rice  is  heavier  than  the  one  of  a year's  standing.
556  THE  SUSHKUTA  SAMHITA.     [Ch»p.  XLM.
should  be  made  spacious  and  kept  clean  and  pure, and  none  but  the  trusted  ones  should  have  access thereto.  The  physician  should  get  the  food  or  diet prepared  by  experienced  cooks  (so  as  to  impart  to  it the  ta^ie  and  the  colour  he  desires),  and  have  it kept  at  a  clean  and  pure  spot,  concealed  from  the  -view of  the  public.  After  that,  the  food  having  been  made innocuous  by  the  admixture  of  anti-toxic  medicines, and  freed  from  all  poison  by  reciting  (an  Arthavan) mantra  over  it,  and  having  been  besprinkled  with  the water  of  mystic  incantation,  should  be  served  (to  the king).
Serving  of  a  IVIcal  :  — Now  I  shall  describe the  mode  of  serving  out  the  different  dishes.  Clarified butter  should  be  served  out  in  a  vessel  of  steel  (Kanta- Loha)  ;  Peya,  in  a  silver  bowl ;  and  all  kinds  ot  fruit and  confectionary  (such  as  the  Laddukas),  on  leaves. The  preparations  of  meat  known  as  the  Parishushka  and Pradigdha  Mansam  should  be  served  on  golden  plates  ; fluid  edibles  and  meat  essences  in  silver  bowls;  Katvaras and  Kharas  in  stone  utensils  ;  and  cool  boiled  milk (Payah)  in  copper  vessels.  Other  drinks,  wines  and cordials  should  be  given  in  earthen  pots ;  and  Raga- Sh^davas  and  Sattakas,  in  cool  pure  glass  bowls,  or  in vessels  made  of  crystal  and  Vaidurya  gems.  The  cook should  ]ilace  the  bowls  containing  preparations  of  pulse, boiled   rice    and   lambatives   on   clean,   spacious    trays
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHA'NAM.
557
I
of  fanciful"  design,  and  spread  them  out  in  front  fof the  king/  All  kinds  of  desserts,  confectionary  and dry  viands  should  be  served  on  his  right,  while  all soups  etc.,  meat- essences,  drinks,  cordials,  milk,  Khada- Yusha,  and  Peya  should  be  placed  on  his  left. Bowls  containing  preparations  of  treacle,  Raga-Shadava, and  Sattaka  should  occup)-  a  place  midway  between the  two  sets  of  bowls  described  above.
The  intelligent  physician,  well  conversant  with the  rules  of  serving  dishes  as  above  laid  down,  should attend  upon  the  king  at  his  table,  and  spread  out  on  the purified  level  floor  of  a  solitary,  beautiful,  spacious, blissful,  perfumed  and  flower-decorated  chamber,  and the  king  should  partake  of  those  sacred  and  pleasant dishes,  served  neither  hot  nor  cold,  and  cooked  and seasoned  in  the  desired  mode,  and  possessed  of  their specific  tastes.  „
The  physician  in  attendance  should  see  that  the king  first  partakes  of  the  sweet  dishes,  then  of  the  acid and  saline,  and  of  the  pungent  and  other  ones  at the  close  of  the  meal.*  First  or  at  the  forepart  of  a meal,  such  fruit  as  the  pomegranate,  etc.,  should  be  eaten, after  that,  Peyas  and  boiled  rice  and  prepared  dishes,  as
*  The  lasle  of  sweel  viands  ealeii  al  the  outset  would  naturally  go  to subdue  llie  Vdyu  located  in  the  stomach  ;  acid  or  saline  taste  partaken of  at  the  middle  of  a  meal  would  rouse  u|)  the  fire  of  digestion  located  in the  pancreas  (x\gnyashaya),  while  the  pungent  taste  enjoyed  at  its  close would  lend  to  subdue  the  Kupham.
558  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.      :  Chap.  XLVi.
well  as  confectionary.  Certain  authorities  maintain  that solid  or  thick  viands  should  be  eaten  at  the  outset, while  others  a^er  that  the  contrary  should  be  the rule.  Of  fruits,  the  Amalaka  has  the  greatest  humour- destroying  properties,  and  is  the  most  harmless  of  them all.  Amalaka  (fruit)  is  therefore  recommended  at  the outset,  middle  and  the  close  of  a  meal.  Such  things  as the  Mrinalam  (the  stem  of  a  lotus  plant),  the  Visham  (the lotus  bulb),  Shaluka,  Kanda  and  sugar-cane  should  be eaten  at  the  beginning  of  a  meal,  and  never  at  its  close. A  man,  who  is  well-read  in  the  Science  of  medicine (Ayurveda),  should  sit  during  his  meal  in  an  easy  posture on  a  high  seat  and  partake,  at  the  right  time,  with  his body  erect  and  his  whole  mind  engaged  in  the  act of  eating  light,  wholesome  emollient  and  warm  viands, which  are  congenial  to  his  temperament  and  abound in  fluid  preparations,  with  an  adequate  quantity of  boiled  rice,  neither  too  hurriedly  nor  too  slowlv, even  when  feehng  the  pinch  of  a  keen  and  piercing hunger.
Food  eaten  with  a  good  appetite  tastes  pleasant and  relishing.  The  food  which  is  congenial  to  one's temperament  begets  no  discomfort  after  the  eating. Light  food  is  soon  digested.  Emollient  food  gives tone  and  vigour  to  the  system.  Warm  food  improves the  appetite.  Food  eaten  neither  too  slowlv  nor  too hurriedly   is   uniformly  digested.     Food    abounding    in
Chap.  Xl.VI.j  SUTRASTHAXAM.
559
fluid  components  is  not  iniperfecth'  digested,  nor  is attended  by  any  acid  reaction.  Moderation  in  food leads  to  a  happy  and  perfect  digestion  and  tends  to maintain  the  fundamental  ]irinciples  of  the  bodv  in tlieir  normal  state.  *
During  the  cold  months,  when  the  nights  are  longer, substances,  which  tend  to  subdue  the  bodily  humours which  are  naturally  deranged  during  that  season,  should be  eaten  in  the  morning,  while  during  the  seasons,  when the  days  are  inordinately  long,  things  which  are congenial  in  those  seasons  should  be  eaten  in  the afternoon.  (In  spring  and  autumn )  when  days  and nights  are  equal,  the  meal  should  be  taken  just  at the  middle  part  of  the  day  and  night.*
A  meal  should  not  be  eaten  before  the  appointed time,  nor  before  the  appetite  has  fully  come. Similarly,  over  or  insufficient  eating  should  be  equally refrained  from.  Eating  at  an  improper  time  and  before the  system  feels  light  and  free  brings  on  a  large number  of  diseases,  and  may  ultimately  lead  to  death.  A meal  eaten  at  an  hour  long  after  the  appoiiited  time tends  to  aggravate   the   bodily  Vayu,  which  affects   thg
"  This  rule  holds  good  in  the  case  of  persons,  who  eat  a  single  meal  in the  course  of  a  day  and  night.  Those,  who  are  in  the  habit  of  eating  two meals  a  day,  should  eat  a  light  half  meal  at  one  and  quarter  Prahara  in  the morning  and  another  between  the  third  and  the  fourth  Praharas  in  the afternoon  (Panjikdkfira).  According  to  Jejjada,  the  nieals  should  be between  the  third  and  ilie  fourth  Prahara  both  in  the  day  and  night.
560  THE  SUSHRUTA    SAMHITA.    [Chc>p.  XLVI.
digestive  fire,  and  offers  serious  obstacles  in  the  way  of its  digestion.  The  food  thus  digested  with  difficulty  in the  stomach  creates  discomforts  and  destroys  all  desire for  a  second  meal.  Insufficient  diet  gives  but  in- adequate^satisfaction,  and  tends  to  weaken  the  bod)'. Over  eating,  on  the  contrary,  is  attended  with  such  dis- tressing symptoms,  as  languor,  heaviness  of  the  body, disinclination  for  movements,  and  distension  of  the stomach,  accompanied  by  rumbling  in  the  intestines,  etc. Hence  it  behoves  a  man  to  take  only  as  much  food  as he  can  easily  digest,  which  should  be  well  cooked  and made  to  possess  all  the  commendable  (adequately nutritive)  properties.  Moderation  in  diet  is  the  golden rule,  besides  taking  into  consideration  the  demerits  of a  particular  food  before  partaking  thereof  and  the nature  of  the  time  (day  or  night)  it  is  eaten.
Boiled  rice  food  (Annam  )  which  is  impure  and  dirty, infested  with  poison,  or  out  of  which  another  has eaten  a  portion  as  well  as  that  which  is  full  of  weeds, pebbles,  dust  etc.,  which  the  mind  instinctivel)^  repels, or  cooked  on  the  previous  day  or  which  has  been kept  standing  over-night,  as  well  as  that  which  is insipid  or  emits  a  fetid  smell,  should  be  similarly rejected.  Also  food  which  has  been  cooked  long  ago, or  has  become  cold  and  hard,  and  has  been rewarmed  or  which  has  been  imperfectly  strained,  or  is burnt   and  insipid   should  also  not  serve  as  food.     More
Chap.  XLVi.  ]  SUTRASTHANAM.
561
and  more"  palatable  dishes  should  be  successively  taken in  the  course  of  a  meal.  During  the  course  of  a  meal, the  mouth  should  be  frequently  rinsed  or  gargled inasmuch  as  the  palate  thus  constantly  being  cleansed becomes  more  susceptible  to  taste,  and  anythifig  eaten thereafter  is  relished  the  better  and  gives  all  the pleasures  of  a  first  morsel.  The  palate  affected  with  a sweet  taste  at  the  outset  fails  to  appreciate  the  tastes  of the  successive  dishes.  Hence,  the  mouth  should  be washed  at  intervals  during  the  meal.  Sweet  food  eaten with  a  relish  pleasurably  affects  the  mind,  brings  joy, energy,  strength,  and  happiness  in  its  train,  and contributes  to  the  growth  of  the  body  ;  whereas  the one  of  a  contrary  character  is  attended  with  opposite effects.  The  food,  which  does  not  satiate  a  man  even after  repeated  eating,  should  be  considered  as  agree- able   (Svddu)     to   him.     After  finishing   a   meal   water
» should  be  drunk  in  a  quantity  whij:h  would  be  beneficial.
Food    adhering   to  the  teeth    should  be  gently   drawn
out   by   means   of    a   tooth-pick,    inasmuch    as   if    not
removed  a  kind  of  fetor  is  produced  in  the  mouth.
•I The   Vayu   is  increased   after  the     completion     of
digestion,  the  Pittam,  during  the  continuance  of the  process,  while  the  Kapham  is  increased  immediately after  the  act  of  eating.  Hence,  the  Kapham  is  to  be subdued  after  the  close  of  a  meal,  and  the  intelli- gent eater  should  attain  that  end  by  partaking  fruit 71
562  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.    [  Chap.  XLVi.
of  an  astringent,  pungent,  or  bitter  taste,  or  by chewing  a  betel  leaf  prepared  with  broken  areca  nut, camphor,  nutmeg,  clove,  etc.,  or  by  smoking,  or  by means  of  anything  that  instantaneously  removes  the viscidity  Mn  the  cavity  of  the  mouth,  and  permeates it  with  Its  own  essence.
Then  the  eater  should  take  rest,  like  a  king,  till the  sense  of  drowsiness  incidental  to  eating  is  removed. After  this  he  should  walk  a  hundred  paces  and  lie  down in  a  bed  on  his  left  side.  After  eating,  a  man  should enjoy  soft  sounds,  pleasant  sights  and  tastes,  sweet  per- fumes, soft  and  velvety  touch,  in  short  anything  that ravishes  the  soul  and  enwraps  the  mind  with  raptures of  joy,  since  such  pleasurable  sensations  greatly  help the  process  of  digestion.  Sounds,  which  are  harsh  and grating,  sights,  M'hich  are  abominable,  touches,  that  are hard  and  unpleasant,  smells,  which  are  fetid  and  dis- agreeable, encountered  after  a  meal,  or  the  eating  of impure  and  execrable  boiled  rice,  or  a  loud  side- splitting laugh  after  a  meal  is  followed  by  vomiting.
The  after-meal  siesta  should  not  be  long  and continuous  ;  basking  before  a  fire,  exposure  to  the sun,  travelling,  driving  in  a  carriage,  swimming,  bathing etc.,  should  be  avoided  just  after  the  close  of  a  full and  hearty  meal.  A  diet  which  abounds  in  fluid courses  should  be  refrained  from.  Only  a  single  taste should     not     be     enjoyed    in    the   course   of    a    meal.
Chap.  XLV[.  ]  SUTFASTHA'NAM.  563
Cooked  potherbs,  boiled  rice  of  inferior  quality,  and a  course  of  diet  abounding  in  acid  taste  should  be avoided.  Articles  of  one  taste  should  not  be  eaten in  large  quantities  at  a  time,  nor  articles  of  various tastes  should  be  constantly  indulged  in.  A  second meal  should  not  be  eaten  on  the  same  da}'  in  the  event of  the  appetite  having  become  dulled  by  a  previous  meal. Eating  with  a  previous  meal  only  partially  digested seriously  impairs  the  digestive  functions.  A  man of  dull  or  impaired  appetite  should  refrain  from  eating heavy  articles  of  food,  as  well  as  from  partaking  of large  quantities  of  light  substances.  Cakes  should  never be  eaten,  and  a  double  quantitiy  of  water  should be  taken  if  they  are  eaten  at  all  out  of  hunger, by  which  their  safe  digestion  would  be  ensured. Of  drinks,  lambatives  and  confectionary  (solid  food), each  succeeding  one  is  heavier  than  the  one  im- mediately preceding  *it  in  the  order  of  enumeration. Heavy  articles  of  food  should  be  taken  in  half  measures only,  while  the  lighter  ones  may  be  eaten  till  satiety. Liquid  food,  or  that  which  abounds  in  liquid  sub- stances should  not  be  taken  in  large  quantities.  Dry articles  of  food  taken  in  combination  with  a  large number  of  other  substances  fail  to  do  any  injury to  the  stomach.  Dry  food  (Annam)  taken  alone can  not  be  completely  digested.  It  is  transformed into  lumps  in  the  stomach,  is  irregularly  chymed, and   produces   deficient   gastric   digestion   followed  by
364  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA     [Chap.  XLVI.
a  reactionary  acidity.  The  injested  food)  whether of  a  character  that  stamps  it  as  belonging  to  the Vidahi  group  or  not,  is  but  incompletely  digested and  gives  rise  to  a  reactionary  acidity  in  the  event of  the  Pittam  being  confined  in  the  stomach,  or  in  the intestines.  Dry  food  (cakes,  etc.\  incompatible  food combinations  (milk  with  fish  and  so  on),  and  those,  which are  long  retained  in  the  stomach  in  an  undigested  state, tend  to  impair  the  digestive  functions  (Agni).
The  Kapham,  Pittam,  and  Vayu  respectively  pro- duce the  types  of  mucous  indigestion  of  chvme (Amajirnam),  acid  indigestion  (Vidagdhajirnam),  and indigestion  due  to  incarcerated  fecal  matter  (Vish- tabdhajirnami.  Certain  authorities  aver  that  there  is  a fourth  class  of  indigestion,  known  as  the  indigestion of  unassimilated  chyle  (  Rasa-shesha).  Drinking  of  an abnormal  quantity  of  water,  irregular  eating,  voluntary suppression  of  any  natural  urging  of  the  bodv,  sleep in  the  day,  keeping  of  late  hours  in  the  night, partaking  of  a  light  food  with  a  strong  appetite  are the  factors  which  interfere  with  the  proper  digestion of  food  and  develop  symptoms  of  indigestion.  The food  taken  by  a  person  under  the  influence  of  envv. passion,  greed,  or  anger,  etc.,  or  by  a  man  suffering from  a  chronic  distemper,  is  not  properly  digested.
Types  of  Indigestion  :— A  case  of  indi-
s^estion    in    which     the     undis^ested     food    matter   ac-
l
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  3UTRASTHAXAM.
565
quires  a  sWeet  taste  is  called  chymous  (or  mucous; indigestion  (Amajirnam),  that  in  which  the  undi- gested food  acquires  an  acid  taste  in  the  stomach is  called  Vidagdha  indigestion.  The  form  in  which the  food  matter  brought  down  into  the  stomach is  partially  or  irregularly  digested  (one  portion*  being digested,  the  other  being  not)  followed  by  a  pricking or  piercing  pain  in  the  stomach  and  entire  suppres- sion of  the  flatus,  is  called  Vishtabdha  indigestion. The  type  known  as  indigestion  of  unassimilated  chyle is  characterised  by  the  absence  of  any  acid  or  sour eructations,  but  the  patient  feels  no  inclination  for  food inspite  of  the  normal  character  of  the  eructations,  if  any. The  type  is  further  characterised  by  pain  about  the region  of  the  heart,  and  water-brash.  The  unfavourable symptoms  of  indigestion  are  sudden  loss  of  conscious- ness, delirium,  vomiting,  water-brash,  languor  with  a gone-feeling  in  the  limbs,  and  v^tigo,  etc.,  which  may end  in  death.
Fasting  is  beneficial  in  a  case  of  Amajirnam  indiges- tion. Ejection  of  the  contents  of  the  stomach  giv^s  relief
in  a  case   of  Vidagdha  indigestion.     Fomentation    will
•
alleviate  a  case  of  Vishtavdha  indigestion,  while  in  an indigestion  of  unassimilated  chyle,  the  patient  should be  confined  to  bed  and  fomentations  and  digestive medicines  should  be  administered  as  well.  In  a  case  of Vidagdha  indigestion  the   patient   should   be   made   to
566  THE  SUSHRUTA  SAMHITA.    [  Chap.  XLVI.
vomit  the  contents  of  his  stomach  with  the  help  of warm  water  saturated  with  salt,  while  in  a  case  of chymous  indigestion  the  patient  should  forego  all  food till  he  is  restored  to  his  natural  condition.  A  patient suffering'  from  indigestion  whose  S5'stcm  has  been cleansed  and  lightened  with  the  abovesaid  appliances should  go  fasting  till  he  is  restored  to  his  natural condition  as  regards  the  strength  and  humours  of  the body.
The  eating  together  of  both  wholesome  and  unwhole- some articles  of  food  is  called  promiscuous  eating (Samashanam).  Over  or  insufficient  eating  at  intervals and  at  improper  seasons  goes  by  the  denomination of  irregular  eating  (Visham^shanam).  Eating  before a  former  meal  is  thoroughly  digested  in  the  stomach  is called  Adhyashanam.  These  three  kinds  of  eating  are injurious,  and  speedily  give  rise  tp  a  variety  of  diseases, or  may  be  ultimately  Attended  with  fatal  consequences. The  drinking  of  cold  ^^ater  helps  the  speedy  digestion  of a  partially  digested  food,  which  has  already  been  attend- ed with  a  reactionary  acidity,  inasmuch  as  the  coldness of  the  imbibed  water  tends  to  subdue  the  deranged '  Pittam,  and  the  food  thus  moistened  by  the  water naturally  gravitates  into  the  intestines.
The  man,  who  complains  of  a  burning  sensation  in the  stomach,  throat  or  heart,  shall  find  rehef  by  licking a  paste  made  of  honey   and  powdered   Haritaki,  or  of
Chap.  XLVI.  ]  SUTRASTHAN    M.  ,5.
pulverised  Haritaki  and  Draksha.  The  man,  \\ho,  though strong  and  effulgent  with  the  glow   .1  health,  ap.-.rehen an  attack  of  indigestion    in   the   ivorning,    :'\iv partake    of  a    wholesome    mid-day    meal   after taken   powdered    Abhaya  and   Shunti.     Appeti^L. be  experienced  even  in  a  state  of  indigestion,    v.h chyle   or   food  matter,  accumulated  in  the  stoni< pressed  upon  by  the  deranged  humours,  is  confineti  ► corner  of  the  viscus  without  obstructing  the   passage   c heat    of  the   local    fire.     This   vicarious   appetite   kills its  duped  victims  with  the  swiftness  of  a  poison.
Specific  properties  of  matter:  -Xow
we  shall  deal  with  the  actions  of  several  properties  of matter,  and  fiom  them  should  be  inferred  the  nature  of the  properties  which  are  inherent  in  variou'.>  kinds of  matter.
Coldness — is  pleasurable,  exercises  styptic virtues,  alleviates  epileptic  fits,  thirst  and  a  burning  sen- sation of  the  body,  and  arrests  perspiration.  Heat  is  the reverse  in  its  action  to  coldness.  It  greatly  helps  to  set in  the  process  of  suppuration  in  boils  and  abscesses. Oleaginousness  imparts  a  gloss  or  oiliness,  and  acts  as an  emollient  tonic,  and  cosmetic.  Parchedness  is  the opposite  of  oleaginousness ;  it  produces  stypsis  and  makes a  thing  rough  to  tactual  perception.  Sliminess  is vitalising,  tonic,  heavy  as  regards  digestion,  and  tends* to   produce   Kaphani,   and   brings  about  the  adhesion
r,58  I'HE      :   ;^i-iKU'i-^  ^A^iHITA.       [  Chap.  XLVI.
of  fr  Aured  bunes.     Il-.c  quality  of  absorpti'on  (Vishad)
I   J   opposite  of  sliniiness.    It  absorbs   or   soaks  up
^..>  secretions  and  helps  the   process  of  heahng
'     or    ulcer.      Keenness     or     sharpness    begets
g    and     suppun-^^ion,     and     arrests      secretions.
;ss   or   softness    is    the    oppOvSite   of    sharpness.
...   ./.  less  produces  languor,  increases  excrements,  and
y-jr  conic,   pleasing  and  flesh- buiMing.     Lightness  is  the
opposite  of  heaviness.     It  acts   as   a   liquefacient   and
healing   agent.     The    ten     a  irtues    v."ith   their   actions
have  now  been  described.
Now  hear  me  describe  the   other   ten   properties  of matter  with  their  specific  actions.     Fluidity  is  moisten- ing.      Compactness     is     thickening    and     obstructive. Humidity  is  like   shminesS.    Roughness  is   like  absorp- tion.    Odoriferousness  is  pleasurable,  subtile,   mild   and relishing.     Fetidness  [s  the  opposite   of  -odoriferousness, produces   nausea,   and  brings  on  a  non-rehsh  for  food. Laxativeness   restores   the  normal     condition     of    the humours.       Narcotism     changes      the     condition      of vitality.     Expansiveness  (like   that    of    wine)     is     the property   in   virtue   of  which  a  drug   or    a     substance instantaneously  permeates   the  whole  organism   and  is subsequently   digested.     Evolution  or   Emanativeness  is somewhat  identical   in    its   virtue   with   expansiveness with   the    exception     that   it   permeates   the    organism in   its   undigested   state,  aud   tends   to  disintegrate  the
J
Chap.  XLVL]  SUTRASTHANAM.  569
root  prfhciples  of  the  body.  Instantaneoiisness, like  the  expansion  of  a  drop  of  oil  cast  into  a  bowl  of water,  helps  to  permeate  the  whole  organism simultaneously  with  the  use  of  a  drug.  Subtility  is  the quality  in  virtue  of  which  a  thing  can  penetrate  into  the smallest  capillaries  and  channels  of  the  body.»  These twenty  qualities  or  virtues  have  been  described  as they  are.
Now  we  shall  describe  the  transformations  which  the food  stuffs  undergo  in  the  organism.  This  animated organism  is  composed  of  the  five  fundamental  material principles,  and  the  food  of  a  living  organic  being necessarily  partakes  of  the  character  of  its  corporeal components.  The  food,  which  consists  of  live  funda- mental material  principles  (elements),  is  digested,  in its  turn,  by  the  five  elemental  heat  or  fire,  and  each of  its  constituent  principles  goes  to  augment  its  own kindred  in  the  human  organism.^
The  food,  which  is  followed  by  a  sweet,  digestive reaction,  goes  to  increase  the  quantity  of  Pittam,  while the  one,  which  is  completely  digested,  contributes towards  the  augmentation  of  the  bodily  Vayu  (nerv^e force).  The  stool  and  the  urine  are  the  excreted portion  of  the  well-digested  food,  the  lymph  chyle  is the  substance  drawn  from  the  well- matured  chyle, (as  has  been  described  in  the  chapter  on  the  description of    Blood,    Chap.    XIV.   of    the    present   work).     The
570  THE   SUSHRUTA   SAMHITA.     [Chap.  XLVl.
lymph  chyle  carried  a\vay  by  the  vital  Vayu  known as  Vyana  tends  to  strengthen  all  the  fundamental pnnciples  of  the  body.
Kaphftm  is  the  excreted  portion  of  the  lymph chyle,  the  Pittam  is  that  of  the  blood,  the  waxy impurities  found  in  the  tympanum,  etc.,  are  the excreted  portions  of  flesh.  Perspiration  is  the excreted  matter  of  fat.  Nails  and  hair  are  the excreted  portions  of  the  bones.  The  waxy  deposits found  in  the  corners  of  the  e3'es,  and  the  oily  secretions which  sometimes  mark  the  skin  are  the  excreted  por- tions of  marrow.  With  the  dawn  of  day  a  man  wakes from  sleep,  and  his  heart  unfolds  like  a  lotus  flower, and  so  remains  till  sleep  folds  up  his  eyelids.  Hence, the  root  principles  of  the  body  continue  non- humid  during  the  state  of  waking.  Accordingly,  a man  may  partake  of  a  meal  ac  night,  even  if  the food  eaten  in  the  day  continues  till  then  undigested, without  the  fear  of  committing  the  physical  sin  of Adhyashanam  (super-eating).  But  the  reverse  is  the case  in  respect  of  a  similar  conduct  in  the  night when  man  has  recourse  to  sleep  and  his  heart Remains  constricted  in  a  state  of  unconsciousness, and  the  root  principles  of  his  body  become  loose and  charged  with  humidity.  Hence,  it  is  beneficial  to fast  on  the  following  day  in  the  event  of  the  food  taken overnight  being  found  to  be  not  properly  digested.
Chap.  XLV.  SUTR.ASTHANAM.  57 1
He,  who  carefully  peruses  lliese  rules  regarding the  regimen  of  diet  as  approved  of  by  the  holy^sage Dh^nvantari,  the  greatest  of  all  the  Rajarshis  ( royal aermits),  becomes  great  in  wisdom,  and  is  sure  to  be glorified  with  the  proud  distinction  of  being  the  medical adviser  of  his  king  or  his  nobles.
Thus  ends  the  forty-sixth  Chapter  of  the  SutrasthSnam  in   the  Sushruta SamhilA  which  treats  of  Food  and  Drink.
Here  ends  the  Sutrastharnam.
]
R
Su^ruta
605
An  English  translation  of  the
S873
Sushruta  samhita
1907
v.l
PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET
UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY
